14th Annual France-Atlanta Event Series Returns to Georgia Tech
This multidisciplinary event series takes place every fall and is centered on innovation and designed to foster cooperation and exchange between France and the U.S. Southeast.
Screening of Lost in Traplanta will be followed by discussion with filmmaker Mathieu Rochet; Dr Dax, member of Dungeon Family and cultural advisor of&nbsp;Lost in Traplanta; and Joycelyn Wilson, professor of&nbsp;hip hop&nbsp;studies at Georgia Tech.
Sep 28, 2023
Georgia Tech and the Consulate General of France in Atlanta present the 14th annual
France-Atlanta
series from Sept. 22 to Nov. 6. This series of events will center on innovation and is designed to foster French-American cooperation in the fields of science, culture, humanitarian affairs, and business. Since its creation in 2010, France-Atlanta has drawn more than 30,000 participants.
“France and Georgia Tech share a long history of collaboration and friendship, and we count the French Republic as dear friends and vital partners in our mission,” said Georgia Tech President Ángel Cabrera. “Together, we’ve built a robust transatlantic bridge that connects our cities and nations in support of education, diplomacy, and research, and I look forward to a 14th year of showing the world what our powerful partnership has accomplished and the promise it continues to hold for the future.”
Upcoming France-Atlanta Events
‘ Lost in Traplanta’
Friday, Sept. 29
6 p.m.
A screening of the short film series  Lost in Traplanta , about the quest of a young Frenchman to reunite the famous rap duo Andre 3000 and Big Boi, known as Outkast, and his discovery of the Atlanta hip-hop scene. The screening will be followed by a discussion with filmmaker Mathieu Rochet; Dr. Dax, member of the Dungeon Family and cultural advisor on
Lost in Traplanta ; and
Joycelyn Wilson , professor of hip-hop studies at Georgia Tech.
City/Cité : Terrestrial Cities
Saturday, Oct. 14
10:40 a.m.
Starting from the notion of “terrestrial cities,” this series of talks invites experts from Marseille and Atlanta to share initiatives and strategies with the public. In partnership with
Ellen Bassett , John Portman Chair and Dean of the College of Design, and
Julie Kim , William H. Harrison Chair of the School of Architecture, this event features a conversation with  Christina Shivers , 2023 Ventulett NEXT Fellow in the School of Architecture, and French-English architect Andrew Todd.
Smart and Sustainable Mobility
Friday, Oct. 20
10:30 a.m.
This panel discussion will delve into the key aspects of building sustainable smart cities. Panelists of researchers, corporate executives, and ecosystem builders will explore innovative logistics partnerships, the role of sustainable mobility, and the importance of fostering bilateral collaboration in research and innovation between France and Georgia.
Award-Winning Author Mohamed Mbougar Sarr (2021 Prix Goncourt)
Monday, Oct. 23
12:30 p.m.
A conversation with
Stephanie Boulard
from the School of Modern Languages and Senegalese author Mohamed Mbougar Sarr, 2021 winner of the Prix Goncourt for his novel  La plus secrète mémoire des hommes  ( The Most Secret Memory of Men ).
Several Georgia Tech departments will sponsor seminars and workshops. Learn more and view a full schedule of events at
france-atlanta.org .
Additional Images
Contact
Siobhan Rodriguez
Institute Communications
Email
sar30@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000