2021-22 Emerging Leaders Program Cohort Selected
The sixth cohort of Georgia Tech’s Emerging Leaders Program has been selected.
Tech Tower
Jun 24, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
The sixth cohort of Georgia Tech’s Emerging Leaders Program has been selected. Starting in Fall 2021 and continuing through Spring 2022, participants will take part in a number of leadership development activities, including a fall weekend workshop, monthly workshops, small-group work, and a 360-degree assessment.
“I’m excited to welcome the sixth cohort of the Emerging Leaders Program,” said Steven W. McLaughlin, provost and executive vice president for Academic Affairs. “The program supports faculty invested in pursuing their leadership journey, which benefits the Institute’s strategic plan goals and the Georgia Tech community as a whole.”
The sixth cohort reflects many of Georgia Tech’s Schools and Colleges.
College of Design
Young Mi Choi , Associate Professor and Associate Chair, School of Industrial Design
Ivan Allen College of Liberal Arts
Justin B. Biddle , Associate Professor, School of Public Policy
Jenna Jordan , Associate Professor and Director of Graduate Studies, Sam Nunn School of International Affairs
Usha Nair-Reichert , Associate Professor and Director of Master’s Programs, School of Economics
College of Sciences
Andrew Newman , Professor, School of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences
Zhigang Peng , Professor, School of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences
Chandra Raman , Professor, School of Physics
College of Engineering
Chloé Arson , Associate Professor, School of Civil and Environmental Engineering
Lakshmi Prasad Dasi , Rozelle Vanda Wesley Professor and Professor, Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering
Elliot Moore II , Associate Professor and Associate Chair for Undergraduate Affairs, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Kamran Paynabar , Fouts Family Early Career Professor and Associate Professor, H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Mary Lynn Realff , Associate Professor and Associate Chair for Undergraduate Programs, School of Materials Science and Engineering
Julian J. Rimoli , Pratt & Whitney Professor and Associate Professor, Daniel Guggenheim School of Aerospace Engineering
Iris Tien , Williams Family Early Career Professor and Associate Professor, School of Civil and Environmental Engineering
May Dongmei Wang , Professor, Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering
Shannon Yee , Associate Professor, George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering
The Emerging Leaders Program started in 2016 and is designed for associate and full professors who have attained tenure. The program is a collaboration between the Office of the Provost, the Office of the Executive Vice President for Research, the Institute for Leadership and Social Impact, and the Office of Graduate Education and Faculty Development.
Learn more about the Emerging Leaders Program.
Additional Images
Contact
Office of the Provost
provostsoffice@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000