2023 Annual CIOS Award Winners Announced
Winners receive a $1,000 stipend courtesy of the Class of 1940 and Jack and Frances Mundy endowments.
Image shows 2023 Award Winner Charles Kemp, recognized for his course BMED 8813: Robotic Caregivers.
Mar 01, 2024
Georgia Tech's Center for Teaching and Learning and Office of Academic Effectiveness recently announced the recipients of the 2023 Student Recognition of Excellence in Teaching: Annual CIOS Award. This award is open to full-time Tech employees teaching credit courses who administer the Course Instructor Opinion Survey (CIOS).
Each January, 40 to 50 instructors are selected for the award for courses taught the previous calendar year. Winners receive a $1,000 stipend courtesy of the Class of 1940 and Jack and Frances Mundy endowments.
The CIOS Award acknowledges instructors with exceptional response rates and scores on the CIOS, emphasizing respect for students, enthusiasm about teaching, and fostering interest in the subject matter. A minimum 85% student response rate is required, and ties are resolved based on response rates.
“Receiving this award is a great honor, and I’m delighted that students were motivated to learn and tackle some very difficult programming assignments as part of the course,” said Laurie Garrow, professor in the School of Civil and Environmental Engineering. Garrow was selected for the award based on her work in CEE 8813: Special Topics – Airline Revenue Management. As part of the course, she interviewed over 30 academic and industry representatives, then created a simulation tool for research and teaching. Her work has expanded outside of Georgia Tech and is currently being used by airline practitioners around the world.
The distribution of CIOS Awards between small and large classes aligns with the proportion of these classes in the Georgia Tech catalog over the past three years. Nominations are not accepted, and certain categories of employees, such as visiting or part-time faculty, postdoctoral scholars, graduate students, and upper-level administrators, are ineligible; however, part-time faculty will be considered eligible for the 2024 calendar year.
The awards underscore Georgia Tech's commitment to excellence in teaching and highlight instructors’ roles in creating a thriving learning environment.
“We’re delighted to recognize the exceptional teaching taking place at Georgia Tech,” said Laura Carruth, associate vice provost for Transformative Teaching and Learning and executive director of the Center for Teaching and Learning.
In addition to the CIOS Awards, the Center for Teaching and Learning and the Office of Academic Effectiveness also publish
CIOS Honor Rolls . Instructors who make the honor roll receive a certificate of recognition.
To see a full list of the 2023 CIOS Award winners, visit the Center for Teaching and Learning’s
blog .
Related links
Center for Teaching and Learning
CIOS Honor Rolls
Contact
Bethany Harris
Center for Teaching and Learning
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000