5 Ways to Make the Most Out of a Career Fair
With the Spring All Majors Career Fair taking place Jan. 22–23, students should be making preparations for the event and to talk with prospective employers.
Career Fair
Jan 18, 2024
With the
Spring All Majors Career Fair
taking place Jan. 2 2
–
23 , students should be making preparations for the event and
to talk
with prospective employers.
The first step to attending the event is to
register through
CareerBuzz , though walk-up attendance
is
also
pe rmitted .
A few
tips
for
students
to be prepared:
Attend the fair . This may seem obvious, but not every student does.
The event offers networking opportunities for students of all majors.
If you get there and talk to an employer who is looking for engineering students and
you're
a liberal arts or sciences major, ask if they have colleagues you could contact about opportunities in other areas of their business.
Practice . Most students
know
to practice for an interview, but not a fai r. Preparing
a 20- to 30-second “elevator pitch” that briefly captures who you are, what you offer, and what
you’re
looking for
can help you feel confident when you talk with recruiters . Practice delivering a smooth elevator pitch, giving a firm handshake, and making good eye contact.
Plan your strategy . To make the most of your time at the fair,
review
the company list to know who will be there and
identify
priority employers to target. Look online at
the list of employers attending the fair
to see which companies you want to talk with and look up background information on those employers.
Get — and stay — organized .  Have
a plan for how to keep everything organized as you get materials during the fair. You
may
walk out with a lot of business cards and handouts, and it can be overwhelming .
Take only the information you
need, and
make notes on the back of business cards or on your phone to remember key discussion points for when you follow up after the fair.
Follow up . If recruiters instruct you to apply on
CareerBuzz
after the fair, be sure to do so promptly. Also, many recruiters use LinkedIn as a resource for filling positions, and students should be visible and active there.
Students should c onnect on LinkedIn with anyone they
spoke to
at the fair. Even if the request
isn’t
accepted, students will have gotten their names in front of the recruiter one more time. The request should be paired with a follow-up email as well.
Attending
the fair is about more than just employment.
Coming out with a solid lead is a great goal, but
it’s
also about
networking and the
experience
of
participating
in the fair .
Learn more about how to prepare for the fair .
The
Spring All Majors Career Fair
takes place Jan. 2 2
–
2 3
in the
Exhibition Hall, from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. each day . Students should wear professional business attire and bring their
BuzzCard
and several copies of their
resume. Students can
register to attend the fair through
CareerBuzz  for priority access. Walk-up attendance is also welcome.
Additional Images
Related links
Spring 2024 All Majors Career Fair
Georgia Tech Career Fairs
Georgia Tech Career Center
Contact
Kristen Bailey
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000