Administrative Services Center Expands Its Scope
This summer, the Administrative Services Center has welcomed several new teams into its portfolio as it continues to position itself as the one-stop shop for high-volume, administrative services.
Jun 30, 2023
This summer, the Administrative Services Center (ASC) has welcomed several new teams into its portfolio as it continues to position itself as the one-stop shop for high-volume, administrative services while assisting in retooling resources for an improved user experience. Recently added teams include Audio Visual, Directory Services, and Technology Support Services (formerly the Enterprise Services Desk). ​
GTRI’s recruiting team was also integrated into the ASC in alignment with
Tech’s overarching people-focused strategy
to provide consistent HR services that support growth across all areas of the Institute.​
Employees can now contact the ASC for these services, where they will be greeted by a knowledgeable agent who will assist them with their question or issue. ​
Contact the ASC
1. You can navigate to the ASC portal at
asc.gatech.edu  to do the following:
Search for answers to your HR or IT questions
Submit a service request or general help request
Schedule a walk-in appointment
2. You can also call the ASC at
404.385.1111
Monday through Friday
HR and Directory Services: 8 a.m. – 5 p.m.
Tech Support Services: 8 a.m. – 6 p.m.
Audio Visual Services: 8 a.m. – 9 p.m.
3. You can even walk-in for an appointment Monday through Friday
HR support at 500 Tech Parkway: 8 a.m. – 5 p.m.
Tech Support Services at Clough Undergraduate Learning Commons: 8 a.m. – 6 p.m.
You are invited to explore the ASC at  asc.gatech.edu .
Additional Images
Related links
Administrative Services Center
Administrative Excellence
Delivering Better Administrative Services to Support the Growing Needs of Campus
Contact
Rachael Pocklington
Institute Communications
Email
rpocklington@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000