The Advanced Technology Development Center’s 2016 Startup Showcase is May 12
The event features some of the most promising technology startups from across Georgia.
The ATDC Startup Showcase is the annual event that highligts the most promising technology-oriented startups in Georgia and brings together entrepreneurs, investors, and major corporations that seek to partner with these companies on potential initiatives.
Feb 15, 2016
— Atlanta, GA
More than 800 technology leaders, investors, corporate partners, entrepreneurs, university researchers, and students will get a first-hand look at 50 of the most innovative and successful emerging technologies at the 2016 ATDC Startup Showcase. The event, which features technology startups from across Georgia, celebrates ATDC’s 36-year legacy of helping entrepreneurs launch successful startups in the state. It will be held Thursday, May 12, from 1:30 p.m. until 5:30 p.m. at the Georgia Tech Hotel and Conference Center. “We’re extremely proud of the companies we will be presenting this year at Showcase; they represent a diverse array of technologies that are providing real solutions in different markets ranging from financial technology and advanced manufacturing, to agriculture and information security, among others,” said Jennifer Bonnett, ATDC’s acting general manager. “The Showcase is a fun and engaging way to show investors, entrepreneurs, and others these successful companies are innovative leaders in their fields and creating jobs right here in Georgia.” Each year, ATDC member companies that have met rigorous growth milestones are selected to graduate from the startup incubator’s ATDC Signature program. The 2016 graduating companies are: Synapp.io:
The company’s data validation technology in the email compliance and deliverability space monitors the health of email contact lists and automates data maintenance to prevent email deliverability challenges. Zoompf:
This startup’s technology continuously audits its clients’ entire websites for the common causes of slow performance to provide prioritized, easy-to-fix steps to solve those issues as they occur.  NextInput:
The company is a producer and marketer of next-generation, pressure-sensitive touch technology for smartphones, tablets, laptops, automotive touch zones, and many other touch-related applications. For more information about the Showcase or to RSVP, please visit
http://atdcstartupshowcase.com . The cost to attend the event is $25 per person (early bird until April 12); $50 between April 13 and May 11, and $75 at the door. Students and faculty of any Georgia university enter free with valid ID. About ATDC: The Advanced Technology Development Center (ATDC) is one of the longest-running and largest university-based startup incubators in the country. Founded in 1980, ATDC has graduated more than 160 companies from its ATDC Signature program. To date, those companies have attracted roughly $2 billion in investments. ATDC, which also has programs in Savannah, Athens, and Augusta, is a unit of the Enterprise Innovation Institute, the chief economic development arm of the Georgia Institute of Technology. For additional information, visit
www.atdc.org .
Additional Images
Related links
2016 ATDC Startup Showcase
Contact
For media inquiries, contact: Laura Diamond 404.894.6016 laura.diamond@gatech.edu
Email
peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000