African American Male Initiative Hosts Fall Leadership Summit
The African American Male Initiative at Georgia Tech hosted its Fall Leadership Summit on Oct. 22.
Georgia Tech professors Raheem Beyah (right) and Samuel Graham (left) were presenters at the AAMI Fall Summit on Oct. 22.
Oct 26, 2020
— Atlanta, GA
The African American Male Initiative (AAMI) at Georgia Tech hosted its Fall Leadership Summit on Oct. 22, featuring a host of discussions led by campus and community leaders and engaging sessions for students.
“AAMI is very excited to host the Fall Leadership Summit,” said Jelani Liddell, assistant director of Outreach Initiatives for
OMED: Educational Services
and AAMI program director. “Like most other events this year, we’ve had to transition to a virtual format. However, we will maintain many of the physical components of the summit such as a main keynote, concurrent sessions, a campus partner expo, and attendee networking opportunities.
“We have gathered a very impressive group of strong African American male leaders,” Liddell added shortly before the event, “all who are doing great things in their respective fields. This year we will have several sessions at the summit to explore ways our students can engage strategically to improve their communities. It is our hope that our students exchange perspectives and leave fulfilled, renewed, and better equipped.”
Months before the event, the initiative was renewed for the Institute for the tenth consecutive fiscal year by the University System of Georgia.
“We continue to be honored and humbled by the confidence the University System of Georgia places in our institution to assist in its efforts to increase the educational opportunity, performance, and graduation rates of its Black male students,” said S. Gordon Moore Jr., executive director for the Center for Student Diversity and Inclusion. “This initiative continues to prove successful and beneficial to Georgia Tech, and the entire university system as a whole.”
The summit featured a full day of informative sessions and discussions designed around five themes: voting and activism; leadership and activism; PWIs (Predominately White Institutions) and activism; athletes and activism; and innovation and activism. In addition to Moore, speakers included Georgia Tech’s Raheem Beyah, vice president for Interdisciplinary Research and professor with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering; Samuel Graham, school chair and professor with the School of Mechanical Engineering; and alumni William “Bill” Stanley and Atlanta City Council member and Georgia Tech Alumni Board of Directors member Andre Dickens.
Guest speakers included Damon Williams, chief catalyst for the National Inclusion Excellence Leadership Academy; Ray Dempsey Jr., vice president and chief diversity officer with BP America and president of the BP Foundation; and author and social activist Shaun King.
Learn more about the African American Male Initiative at Georgia Tech by visiting
https://omed.gatech.edu/programs/aami .
Additional Images
Related links
OMED, AAMI Host Third Annual Academic Empowerment Fair at Georgia Tech
Contact
Courtney Hill
Communications Manager
Institute Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
courtney.hill@gatech.edu
Email
courtney.hill@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000