Alex Orso Named Interim Dean of College of Computing
Alex Orso, professor and associate dean, has been appointed interim dean of the College of Computing, effective Aug. 1.
Alex Orso is pictured standing in his office on the Georgia Tech campus. He will assume the role of interim dean of the College of Computing, effective Aug. 1.
May 15, 2023
Alex Orso,
professor
and
a ssociate
dean ,
has been appointed interim dean of the College of Computing, effective Aug. 1. Dean Charles Isbell, who served
since 2019, has been named the new provost of the University of Wis c onsin-Madison.
During
Orso’s
23 years at
Georgia
Tech, he
has
established
himself as a leading expert in software
engineering , with emphasis on software testing and program analysis . H is research has improve d
software reliability, security, and trustworthiness.
He is the recipient of four research impact awards, and his research has been funded by government agencies such as
the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency ,
th e
D epartment of
H omeland
S ecurity ,
the
N ational
S cience
F oundation , and
the
O ffice of
N aval
R esearch , as well as industry collaborators including Fujitsu Labs, Google, IBM, and Microsoft.
Orso is also
a distinguished
member of the
Association for Computing Machinery
and an
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
f e l l o w .
In 2021, he was instrumental in
securing $11 million in funding
for the creation of the Scientific Software Engineering Center, of which he was named the
co-founder and
inaugural director. The center, which is part of
Schmidt
Futures'
Virtual Institute for Scientific Software initiative, will develop new methodologies for im proving high-performance scientific software and train ing
tomorrow’s software engineers.
Beyond the impact of his research, Orso is known for his dedication in the classroom.
Popular among on-campus students and beloved by students in the Online Master of Science in Computer Science (OMSCS) program, he is
considered
one of the original advocates
of
the OMSCS program. He continues to teach
the virtual Software Development Process course for the online master ’ s students
—
a course that he
created and
first taught in 2014 when the lauded degree program launched.
From
2015
to 2017 , he was
a ssociate
s chool
c hair in the School of Computer Science , and he was appointed associate dean in the College of Computing in 2020 . He has embraced his leadership role on campus and ,
in 2021 ,
was elected a
Faculty Executive Leadership Academy fellow .
“We are grateful to Alex for his willingness to step into the role of interim dean,” said Steven W. McLaughlin,
provost
and executive vice president for Academic Affairs. “Alex is a dedicated, steadfast member of the computing community, and the College of Computing could not be in better hands during this period of transition.”
Orso will serve until a new dean is named. An external firm will be
identified
to lead a national search ,
and a campus search committee will also be formed through nominations. Committee nominations can be
submitted
through the
nomination form , which will remain open through May 26.
Additional Images
Related links
Alex Orso Faculty Profile
Search Committee Nomination Form
Contact
Brittany Aiello
Faculty Communications Program Manager
Organizational, Academic, and Research Communications
Email
brittany.aiello@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000