Annual Compliance Training Ending Soon
All active employees (faculty, staff, Tech Temps, retired-but-working, and student employees) hired on or before Oct. 3, 2022, are required to complete the 2022 Annual Compliance Training no later than Monday, Dec. 19.
Nov 28, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
All active employees (faculty, staff, Tech Temps, retired-but-working, and student employees) hired on or before Oct. 3, 2022, are required to complete the 2022 Annual Compliance Training no later than Monday, Dec. 19. This year, employees are required to complete the following training modules:
Effective Global Engagement
Export Control and Trade Compliance
External Activity Reporting and Conflict of Interest/COI Attestation
Identifying and Responding to Sexual Misconduct
Data Excellence
University System of Georgia (USG) Ethics Training
Cybersecurity Awareness Training 2022/Your Role: Internet Security and You
The Annual Compliance Training can be completed on a desktop or laptop. This year’s training includes more modules than in previous years, and you should set aside up to 2.5 hours to complete all the training. It does not need to be finished at one time, and the deadline to complete the training has been extended to Monday, Dec. 19.
Employees are reminded to not use a Firefox browser to complete the Identifying and Responding to Sexual Misconduct module. In addition, employees must complete
and
submit the COI attestation in order to receive credit for this module.
Visit
Georgia Tech’s Employee Learning Portal
today to complete the 2022 Annual Compliance Training. Employees who do not fully complete the requirements by midnight on Dec. 19 may receive a formal disciplinary notice from the Institute.
For more information on the 2022 Annual Compliance Training, including helpful resources, visit
ethicsfirst.gatech.edu/trainingandresources .
Additional Images
Contact
Terry Grumley Bridges , CCEP
GTRI Director of Ethics and Compliance
Office of Ethics and Compliance
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000