Applications Open for Female Founders Entrepreneurship Program
The application window for the five-week program closes March 2.
Members of the Female Founders Program at a virtual meeting. Credit: VentureLab
Feb 25, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
Last fall, 17 teams of entrepreneurs, each one led or co-led by a woman, completed the first phase of the Georgia Tech VentureLab’s inaugural Female Founders program. The teams were led by women from across the Georgia Tech community, including students, faculty, and staff. The program was started after VentureLab noticed a disproportionately low number of female entrepreneurs compared to overall campus enrollment and wanted to see if providing a space specifically for women would help.
Applications for the next class of entrepreneurs are open through March 2. Phase 1 of the five-week program, called “Beginning the Lean Startup Journey,” will kick off on Thursday, March 4. This phase will introduce teams to the lean methodology and teach them to use customer delivery in building their first business model. Participants will also be connected to a network of their fellow entrepreneurs, coaches and instructors, and Atlanta-based female entrepreneurs.
Applicants can sign up on their own or with a team. Men are also welcome to be part of a team, as long as it’s led or co-led by a woman. Of the 17 teams that completed Phase 1, eight decided to continue on to Phase 2, called “Applying Lean Startup.” Happening now, Phase 2 involves teams interviewing approximately six customers per week in helping to better understand and grow their business model.
“These women feel like they now have a plan toward commercialization,” said Melissa Heffner, program manager for the VentureLab. “The program also evolved their understanding of their customer segments, the problems they’re wanting to solve, and the value they can provide through their startups.”
Learn more about the program and apply
here .
Additional Images
Contact
Grace Wyner
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000