Association of Public Land-grant Universities to Give Public Impact Research Award to Partnership for Inclusive Innovation
APLU’s Council on Research Award is one of three presented to research institutes of higher learning.
The Partnership for Inclusive Innovation’s 2023 Summer Internship &nbsp;cohort of 63 students worked on 35 projects across 15 communities in Georgia, North Carolina, and Washington, D.C. (Photo: Chris Ruggiero)
Oct 05, 2023
ATLANTA —
The
Association of Public and Land-grant Universities
(APLU) has named the
Partnership for Inclusive Innovation
at the Georgia Institute of Technology the 2023 winner of its Public Impact Research Award. It is one of three announced by the APLU’s Council on Research (COR), which also included the University of Alaska Fairbanks (Advancing Diversity and Inclusion in Research Award) and the University of New Hampshire (Research Safety and Accountability Award).
“Congratulations to this year’s COR Award winners,” Howard Gobstein, senior vice president for STEM Education and Research Policy and advisor to the president at APLU, said in a statement. “We’re delighted to recognize their leadership and outstanding work done in advancing public impact research, diversity and inclusion in university research, and enhancing safety.”
APLU, based in Washington, D.C., is a research, policy, and advocacy association of more than 250 research universities and land-grant institutions in the U.S., Canada, and Mexico.
The
Public Impact Research Award
recognizes multi-project research efforts focused on community and public impact.
Th e Partnership, formed in 2020, is a regional public-private consortium tasked with leading strategic, statewide efforts to position Georgia as the leader for innovation, opportunity, and shared economic success.
APLU noted the Partnership’s work to foster collaborative projects across 34 institutes of higher learning, including historically Black colleges and universities.
In 2023, the Partnership’s Student Engagement program
brought 63 student interns
from 25 universities across the country to work on 35 projects in 15 communities.
Other Partnership efforts have led to more than 45 multidisciplinary researchers focusing on community-driven needs such as
increasing the use of data science
at small and mid-sized farms across the state of Georgia to enhance production. Another project, in Valdosta, Georgia, led to
improved emergency vehicle response times through the implementation of traffic signal preemption technology. Overall, the $2.36 million in funding awarded by the Partnership to support projects has garnered an additional $17.3 million in funding from other sources.
“W e are honored to have been selected for this recognition,” said Debra Lam, the Partnership’s founding executive director. “Tackling the complex challenges our communities face requires novel approaches to how we innovate. By leveraging the unique strengths of the public and private sectors, our model at the Partnership proves we can have substantive impact that promotes geographic and community inclusion and supports economic mobility for overall shared economic success.”
The APLU award is the second such recognition received by Georgia Tech. In 2014, the APLU named Georgia Tech
one of four recipients
of its Innovation and Economic Prosperity Universities Awards. Georgia Tech was selected because of its efforts through its Enterprise Innovation Institute, the oldest and largest university-based economic development organization of its kind in the country.
“Improving the human condition through research, and more importantly, applying those research innovations to solving real-world challenges, has been our core focus since our founding in in 1885,” said Chaouki T. Abdallah, Georgia Tech’s executive vice president for Research. “The Partnership is the embodiment of that mission and our continued commitment to economic development in Georgia and beyond.”
Additional Images
Contact
Péralte C. Paul
404.316.1210
peralte@gatech.edu
Email
peralte@gatech.edu
Additional information
About the Association of Public and Land-grant Universities
APLU is a research, policy, and advocacy organization dedicated to strengthening and advancing the work of public universities in the U.S., Canada, and Mexico. With a membership of more than 250 public research universities, land-grant institutions, state university systems, and affiliated organizations, APLU's agenda is built on the three pillars of increasing degree completion and academic success, advancing scientific research, and expanding engagement. Annually, member campuses enroll 5.0 million undergraduates and 1.3 million graduate students, award 1.3 million degrees, employ 1.3 million faculty and staff, and conduct
$49.5 billion
in university-based research.
About Georgia Tech
The  Georgia Institute of Technology,  or  Georgia Tech,  is one of the top public research universities in the U.S., developing leaders who advance technology and improve the human condition. The Institute offers  business, computing, design, engineering, liberal arts, and sciences  degrees. Its more than
nearly 48,000
undergraduate and graduate students, representing 50 states and more than 148 countries, study at the main campus in Atlanta, at campuses in France and China, and through distance and online learning. As a leading technological university, Georgia Tech is an engine of economic development for Georgia, the Southeast, and the nation, conducting
$1.45 billion
in research annually for government, industry, and society.
About the Partnership for Inclusive Innovation
Launched in 2020, the Partnership for Inclusive Innovation is a public-private organization that was created to lead coordinated, statewide efforts to position Georgia as the leader for innovation, opportunity, and shared economic success. The Partnership's focus pillars of community research, workforce development, student engagement, and economic opportunity are a powerful combination that provide technical and financial support to democratize innovation through collaboration. Since 2020, the Partnership's work has catalyzed 100+ projects with local governments, universities, startups, and nonprofits. The projects have created new businesses, increased access to financial and social capital, and deployed more than 200 technologies. More information is available at
pingeorgia.org .
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000