'Atlanta Business Chronicle' Names Duckett to 40 Under 40 List
Event honors the next generation of business leaders from metro Atlanta.
Skye Duckett has been named the new vice president and chief human resources officer after a nationwide search and will join Georgia Tech beginning January 31, 2022.
Oct 14, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
Skye Duckett, Georgia Tech’s vice president and chief human resources officer, is one of the
Atlanta Business Chronicle’s
2022 class of emerging leaders in Atlanta. The publication recognizes rising stars who are making a mark in their industries and leading in their communities.
“It’s incredibly humbling to be part of a group being honored for making a positive contribution to Atlanta early in their careers,” Duckett said. “I’ve planted roots here, Atlanta is my home, and I always want to do my best for the city and its institutions.”
Duckett joined Georgia Tech in January . She pledged that, under her leadership, Georgia Tech Human Resources will build and support innovative staffing models to align with the Institute’s strategic plan and reflect the diversity of the Georgia Tech community. Offices reporting to Duckett include Total Rewards and Payroll, HR Business Partners, Employee Relations, Global HR, Employee Experience, Student Employment, and several administrative support departments.
Duckett’s experience includes nearly eight years at Atlanta Public Schools, where she most recently served as the chief human resources officer, leading the organization through a dramatic improvement following the testing scandal of 2009. As a longtime Atlanta resident, she has nearly 20 years of experience in HR roles in urban educational settings.
“It is especially meaningful to receive this award during my first year at Georgia Tech. I will use it as motivation to continue fostering a strong campus community, inspiring our students, and making Georgia Tech a great place to work.”
The
Business Chronicle
will honor the 40 Under 40 class at an
event in November .
Additional Images
Contact
Victor Rogers
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000