Ayers Named Assistant Vice President for Research Communications
Ayers assumed the new role in Institute Communications on Jan. 1.
Angela Ayers, AVP for Research Communications
Jan 10, 2023
— Atlanta, GA
Angela Ayers has been named assistant vice president for Research Communications at Georgia Tech. She brings nearly two decades of Georgia Tech marketing and communications experience to her new appointment and previously served as director of Research Communications Services. She has been managing the Research Communications team on a temporary basis since September and assumed the new role on Jan. 1.
Situated within Institute Communications, Ayers will oversee the broad research communications strategy for the Institute, working to amplify the research happening in Tech’s Colleges and Schools, as well as the 10 Interdisciplinary Research Institutes, the Georgia Tech Research Institute, the Enterprise Innovation Institute, and the hundreds of labs and centers across Georgia Tech. She will be a member of the Institute Communications senior leadership team and report directly to Renee Kopkowski, vice president of Institute Communications.
"I am honored and excited to take on this role in Institute Communications at Georgia Tech. With more than 25 years of experience working with corporate and higher education, I am ready to continue building upon and growing our communications to amplify the impact of our incredible researchers and their work," she said.
Ayers has received industry and internal Georgia Tech awards for numerous campaigns at the Institute. She was also nominated and accepted into Leading Women @ Tech, a yearlong leadership program for women leaders and administrators.
Before arriving at Georgia Tech, Ayers held marketing and communications roles at Lectra, GE Power Systems, Simtrex, and IBM. She holds a master’s degree in marketing from Georgia State University and a bachelor’s degree in advertising from the University of Florida.
by Michelle L. Azriel, Writer/Editor Sr.
Additional Images
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000