Begin Planning for Thanksgiving Holiday
Though students are allowed to return to campus after Thanksgiving, those who travel home for the holiday are encouraged to stay there until the spring semester, which begins Jan. 14, 2021.
Leaves on the ground in November
Nov 05, 2020
— Atlanta, GA
The final instructional days for the Fall 2020 semester are Nov. 23 and 24, 2020, or the Monday and Tuesday before Thanksgiving Day. With final exams being held remotely, most students won’t be returning to campus after the Thanksgiving holiday. Though they’re still allowed to return to campus, those who travel home for the holiday are encouraged to stay there until the spring semester, which begins Jan. 14, 2021.
More detailed guidance on returning home safely will be issued next week, but students are encouraged to begin thinking through their plans now to ensure they are being as safe as possible leading up to and through the holiday.
Those who plan on traveling or returning home for and after Thanksgiving should continue following safety guidelines leading up to the final instructional days. These include wearing face coverings, social distancing, limiting in-person contact, and getting tested at least twice before leaving campus. Georgia Tech’s
on-campus testing sites
— including symptomatic and asymptomatic sites — will remain open through the final instructional days.
Students who will be completing the semester remotely should start making their move-out plan now. The Department of Housing and Residence Life is hosting monthly town halls to answer questions for students living on campus. The last two of this year will take place on Thursday, Nov. 19, and Thursday, Dec. 17, both at 11 a.m. Click
here
for links to join, and for a recording of October’s town hall.
Students living on campus should review Housing’s guidelines before leaving their rooms for the semester. Those not returning to campus in the spring — including graduating students — must move out by noon on their assigned move-out day. For graduating students, move-out day is Sunday, Dec. 13.
Updates on health guidelines, as well as Georgia Tech’s operational status, will be posted on the Tech Moving Forward
page .
Additional Images
Related links
Campus Testing Hours and Locations
Tech Moving Forward
Campus Services Hours of Operation During the Break
Contact
publichealth@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000