Black Student Organizations Celebrate Homecoming
These events empower and bring together the African American community on campus.
Homecoming Step Show
Oct 04, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
Throughout the years, Black student organizations at Tech have developed unique traditions that celebrate their history and culture. Some of these focus on Homecoming week, such as the annual Step Show and the Black Alumni Organization (BAO) Tailgate. These events empower and build community while also celebrating Homecoming on Georgia Tech’s campus.
“The traditions create a safe space at Tech, because seeing others who look similar makes you feel comfortable,” said Kemuel Russell, president of the African American Student Union. The many Black student organizations all contribute to Homecoming week events, bringing everyone together.
On Thursday, Oct. 6, the National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC) will host
Step Show
at the Ferst Center for the Arts. Step is a form of percussive dance in which rhythms are produced through steps, claps, and words. Step Show will take place from 7 to 10 p.m., and tickets are $10 for students, faculty, and staff and $15 for the general public.
The
Black Alumni Organization Tailgate
begins at 2 p.m. Saturday, Oct. 8. This is part of a weekend of events put on by BAO, including a reception Friday and a brunch Sunday celebrating women of color. The tailgate is a great way to meet other students, as well as alumni who will be on campus for the Homecoming game.
“The tailgate gave me an opportunity to connect with Black student organizations and uplift the community,” Russell said. The tailgate takes place in Harrison Square near the statues of the Three Pioneers, celebrating the history of Black students at Tech. This event is a way for many students to find a community they may not usually see in their classes or usual clubs.
“After the tailgate, I wanted to be an advocate for the Black community and spread it to all of campus,” said Russell. Many more traditions follow throughout the year, but Homecoming serves as a beginning for many students. These traditions continue to write the history of Tech and reflect the vibrancy of the campus community.
Additional Images
Contact
Connor White
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000