Board of Regents Approves Funding and Tuition Increases for Fiscal Year 2025
The University System of Georgia Board of Regents has announced budget approvals and tuition increases for its 26 member institutions.
Apr 17, 2024
The University System of Georgia (USG) Board of Regents (BOR) has announced budget approvals and tuition increases for its 26 member institutions. Pending approval by Gov. Brian Kemp, Georgia Tech will receive $527.4 million in total state appropriations – an increase of nearly 9% — from last fiscal year. In addition, the BOR approved a systemwide 2.5% in-state tuition increase, a 5% out-of-state tuition increase, and an additional tuition increase of 2% for out-of-country students for the upcoming fiscal year (FY25).
The USG adopted these increases to help combat the rising costs of institutional operations, while also prioritizing their commitment to affordability for Georgia’s college students. For Georgia Tech, this will be the first tuition rate increase since the 2019-2020 academic year and the third increase in the past 10 years.
“Institutional budgets are under a lot of pressure due to rising costs, and this increase in vital funding sources will enable Georgia Tech to continue to grow and invest in its people in the upcoming fiscal year. It is imperative to boldly align our resources with core institutional priorities and goals to maximize the impact of the increased funding opportunities,” said Shantay N. Bolton, executive vice president for Administration and Finance and chief business officer. “Georgia Tech’s record-breaking applications and enrollment, return on investment, and economic impact are a testament to what we can achieve with continued support from our partners. We are grateful to Gov. Kemp, the General Assembly, and the University System of Georgia for contributing to the continued success of Georgia Tech.”
Tuition and Cost of Attendance
The 2.5% in-state tuition and 5% out-of-state tuition increases apply to both undergraduate and graduate programs. For the first time, the BOR also approved a new rate for out-of-country students, representing a 2% increase over out-of-state tuition.
Tuition for online programs will also increase next year. Georgia Tech’s online and professional master’s programs are increasing by 2.5%. The Online Master of Science in Analytics, Computer Science, and Cybersecurity are each increasing by 8% — though they remain among the country’s most affordable programs.
The USG approved fee and rate increases for many of its 26 member institutions. At Georgia Tech, mandatory fees will increase by 2.7% overall. Notably, of the elective fees, the housing deposit fee of $600 has been eliminated in FY25. Housing and food costs will increase by approximately 3% and 5% respectively.
The USG also created a new online learning fee for students enrolled in distance learning courses or programs who are not enrolled in on-campus courses or residing on campus. This new fee will be prorated for part-time students. The Online Master of Science in Analytics, Computer Science, and Cybersecurity each have a separate tuition and fee structure approved by the BOR and are not affected by this fee. Visit the
USG website  for a full listing of fee and rate changes.
State Appropriations
The BOR approved an additional $43 million in state appropriations for FY25. This includes the permanent reinstatement of $10.1 million initially cut from Tech’s FY24 budget. In FY24, state appropriations accounted for 19% of Georgia Tech’s total budget of $2.7 billion.
New state appropriations for FY25 will include approximately $17 million to fund the cost-of-living adjustment for full-time eligible employees. The majority of pay adjustments will be completed in July; more information will be provided as it becomes available.
Other new allocations include:
$13.5 million in enrollment growth funding.
$4 million in adjustments to employee benefits and maintenance and operations.
$3.6 million reduction for legislative adjustments.
Georgia Tech’s Institute Budget Planning and Administration will submit the FY25 budget to the BOR for spending approval in advance of their meeting in May.
The new fiscal year begins July 1.
Related links
University System of Georgia Approves Tuition for 2024-2025 Academic Year
Contact
Rachael Pocklington
Institute Communications
Email
rpocklington@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000