Boeing, Georgia Tech Unveil New Research Center
The Boeing Manufacturing Development Center works to implement automation in industrial applications.
Boeing executives and Steve Cross, Georgia Tech executive vice president for Research, cut the ribbon to officially open the Boeing Manufacturing Development Center on campus.
Photo by Rob Felt.
Jun 22, 2017
— Atlanta, GA
Boeing and Georgia Tech formally opened a new advanced development research center designed to solve some of the toughest technical challenges in manufacturing.
In the Boeing Manufacturing Development Center, company researchers and Georgia Tech engineering students will work together to implement automation in industrial applications. The center is located in Georgia’s Tech new 19,000-square foot Delta Advanced Manufacturing Pilot Facility.
“This advanced center will let Georgia Tech students collaborate with Boeing engineers to help drive the development of innovative factory automation solutions in aerospace,” said Greg Hyslop, Boeing chief technology officer and senior vice president of Engineering, Test & Technology.
One of the first research projects will focus on utilizing industrial robotics for machining and fabrication applications that can be applied to the manufacturing processes at Boeing.
“Georgia Tech’s long and productive relationship with Boeing includes immersive educational support for our students, collaborative research, and development of aerospace innovations,” said Steve Cross, Georgia Tech executive vice president for Research. “Our relationship is an exemplar for industry-university engagement as we meet jointly shared aspirations for the future of education and the advancement of technology.”
Boeing is the 17 th
company to open an
innovation center on Georgia Tech’s campus . The centers tap into the innovation neighborhood’s vibrant network of students, faculty and researchers, as well as area startups and established companies.
For more than 25 years, Boeing has supported a variety of manufacturing research activities at Georgia Tech, such as developing control systems on cranes, mobile platforms and robotics for moving parts in a factory environment, and active flow control for aircraft wing tips. The Institute is one of
10 primary strategic secondary schools that Boeing partners with
on research worldwide.
Additional Images
Related links
Corporate Innovation Centers at Georgia Tech
Contact
For media inquiries about the Boeing Manufacturing Development Center, please contact Janelle Bernales,
janelle.c.bernales@boeing.com .
For media inquiries about the innovation centers at Georgia Tech, please contact Laura Diamond,
laura.diamond@gatech.edu .
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000