Bolton Named Georgia Tech’s New Executive Vice President for Administration and Finance and Chief Business Officer
Following a national search, the Georgia Institute of Technology has selected Shantay Bolton as its new executive vice president for Administration and Finance and chief business officer.
Jun 21, 2023
Following a national search, the Georgia Institute of Technology has selected
Shantay Bolton
as its new executive vice president for Administration and Finance
(A&F)
and chief business officer . She joins Georgia Tech from
Washington University in St. Louis , where she serves as executive vice chancellor
for Administration and
chief
administrative
officer.
As the executive vice president
for A&F
and chief business officer ,
Bolton
will
serve as a member of the Institute’s executive leadership team and lead in developing administrative and operational strategies across the enterprise in support of Georgia
Tech ’s
strategic plan. She will
provide
leadership, oversight, and direction for
A&F , which includes fi scal
management and reporting; budgeting; human resources; business services; campus sustainability; facilities planning, design, construction, maintenance, and operations; campus safety; information systems and technology;
and
real estate development.
More than 1, 500
staff report through
A&F .
Bolton
will begin her new role on
Aug.
14
and report to President Ángel Cabrera.
“ Shantay’s leadership and operational experience
in higher education will serve us well at Georgia Tech
as we continue to
grow and
implement our strategic plan ,” Cabrera said. “ Her commitment to strengthening the employee experience and developing strategies that advance sustainability and
workplace
diversity will greatly enhance Tech’s ability to achieve our academic, research, and service missions. ”
At Washington University, Bolton
provides
strategic counsel to university leadership and serves as the key point person for university operations. Bolton
is responsible for
spearheading effective strategies in administration, including information technology, human resources, public safety, procurement, supplier diversity, and the Danforth Campus operations and facilities.
Prior to joining Washington University, she served as vice president and deputy chief operating officer at Tulane University and founding director of the Tulane Leadership Institute. Bolton has served as a board member for the American Association of Blacks in Higher Education ;
as a faculty member of the Leadership and Mentoring Institute;
and
as a reviewer
for
the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychologist Anti-Racism Grant Subcommittee . She
is the creator of E3 © : Engage, Educate, Empower ,
which
seeks
to
empower
individuals and teams to achieve organizational goals. She is also an active member of Zeta Phi Beta Sorority and currently serves as an
i nternational
d irector
for Zeta Organizational Leadership ,
which
provides
professional development opportunities for its members.
She earned a
bachelor’s
degree in
p sychology
and a
master’s
in
c ounseling
p sychology
from Alabama A&M University. She
holds
a
Ph.D. in
o rganizational
p sychology
with a concentration in
i ndustrial
p sychology
from Walden University and an MBA in
c orporate
b usiness
from Florida International University.
Her
achievements
at
Washington University
include
the establishment of the Institute for Leadership Excellence; overseeing the university joining the St. Louis Anchor Action Network; Kulture City training for university officers to implement an inclusive safety intervention framework; and launching the IT strategic plan.
Additionally , s he
oversaw
the electrification of the university’s shuttle fleet and the transition to a new dining
services
partnership.
Bolton also
made
an impact
within the St. Louis
area
— including
philanthropic support
for the
March of Dimes, service as a founding donor and
a dvisory
b oard member
of
the
Easter Seals Midwest Women’s Giving Collective ,
and
serving
on the
c ity
of Clayton, Missouri ,
m unicipal
j udge
s election
p anel.
She
was
named a 2023 St.
Louis Titan 100 , for
which she also serves as a board member. Bolton is
an
alum na
of the AGB Institute for Leadership & Governance in Higher Education .
“ It is a privilege to lead Administration and Finance at Georgia Tech, as I believe so deeply in both the impact of public education and how excellence can be achieved by the collective power of people within organizations," said Bolton. "I am eager to work with the leadership team under President Cabrera to achieve institutional goals and to continue the forward momentum of this world-renowned institution by learning from and growing with my new team members."
Current interim leadership for
Administration and Finance
will remain
in
place until Bolton joins in August.
“As we welcome
Shantay ,
I
also extend
my
gratitude to
the interim A&F leadership team ,
who
have
helped the Institute successfully navigate this transitional period
and advance many of the Institute’s strategic initiatives ,”
Cabrera said .
Additional Images
Related links
Administration and Finance
Contact
Rachael Pocklington
Institute Communications
Email
rpocklington@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000