Brendon Banks Is About Business
Brendon Banks will graduate from Georgia Tech in two and a half years thanks to a tireless work ethic and a drive to be the best.
Dec 14, 2023
Brendon Banks always felt a connection to Georgia Tech. Along with his ties to Atlanta, Banks saw a parallel between himself and the Institute that made it the only choice for him when he graduated from Lovejoy High School in May 2021.
“Georgia Tech has always been that school that’s been about business, just like I am, and if you can get a degree from here, it’s life-changing,” he said.
In just two and a half years, Banks is prepared to walk across the Commencement stage with a degree in business administration with a marketing focus. As a child, his parents taught him the importance of finishing what he started, and he brought that mentality to his time at Georgia Tech.
“I worked as hard as I possibly could to graduate, to be the best in my classes, and to be the best person I could be. It’s something I was obsessed with — to be the best and to be successful — and I wouldn’t be denied,” he said. “I take incredible pride in being able to graduate from here and call myself a Yellow Jacket.”
Banks picked up his work ethic from his parents, and he shares a passion for business with his father.
“My dad has always been a businessman, and I took after him in almost every way,” Banks said. “I’ve always excelled in business classes because it comes naturally to me,” he said, adding that the strong reputation of the Scheller College of Business drew him to Georgia Tech.
While taking six courses each semester and a full summer schedule didn’t allow much time for extracurricular activities, Banks poured himself into his academics and internship with the Atlanta Falcons marketing department. His work in the field led to a leadership position within the program, where he became part of the group that hired the next round of interns and regularly met with executives within the organization.
“Meeting new people and being in the room with the vice presidents and other executives has been a highlight of my experience,” he said. “That’s the kind of person I want to be one day, and I got to see that they’re just like me and that I can do that.”
Banks will not only achieve his goal of graduating from Georgia Tech but will also become the first person in his family to graduate from college, an achievement that he hopes sets an example for the next generation. Though he is the first, Banks gives a lot of credit to his mother, father, and girlfriend for their continuous motivation and support throughout the process.
After turning his tassel inside McCamish Pavilion, Banks will take time to celebrate with the family and friends who helped him throughout his journey as he mulls several job offers from professional sports organizations and government agencies.
Contact
Steven Gagliano
- Institute Communications
Email
Steven.gagliano@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000