Buzz Needs Your Vote for Mascot Hall of Fame’s Class of 2023
You can help Buzz join the Mascot Hall of Fame by voting online through Saturday, May 27.
Photo courtesy of Georgia Tech Athletics
May 16, 2023
From Bobby Jones to Calvin Johnson, Tech has a proud history of producing hall of famers, and now you have the chance to help a beloved Georgia Tech icon into the Mascot Hall of Fame.
Buzz, first introduced in 1980 and a fixture at campus events ever since, is among 18 finalists for the Mascot Hall of Fame’s newest class. The public voting period is open until midnight on Saturday, May 27, and you can vote once a day. The public vote will account for a portion of the final tally, with the Mascot Hall of Fame's executive committee and membership holders making up the remainder. This year’s inductees will be announced on Friday, June 23.
Buzz's competition on the ballot comes from the college and professional ranks, including a fellow Atlanta native –– Freddie Falcon. ACC foes Rameses from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Otto the Orange from Syracuse University and the Blue Devil from Duke University are also vying for a spot.
Whether Buzz is conducting the band, firing up crowds, or performing skits, the Tech mascot overwhelmingly meets the Hall of Fame's criteria of being "unique, fun, and memorable" while demonstrating a major impact on their community.
It’s already been a monumental year for the stinger-shaking mascot, who took
first place at the NCA and NDA Collegiate National Cheer and Dance Championship
in Daytona Beach in early April.
"Buzz has skyrocketed this year and is racking up the accolades to prove it," said Shana Spann, head cheerleading coach. "He's won Best Mascot 2022 with the CFA Peach Bowl, NCA College Nationals 2023, and is now nominated for the Mascot Hall of Fame. He has been present in the community more than ever with his fun fan interactive gameday skits. We're excited to see what he brings to the 2023-24 season and we are thankful for the Georgia Tech and Atlanta community support of our beloved mascot."
To date, 27 mascots reside in the Mascot Hall of Fame. The first class was inducted in 2005. To learn more, and to cast your daily vote for Buzz, visit
mascothalloffame.com .
Additional Images
Related links
Mascot Hall of Fame Vote 2023
Contact
Steven Gagliano
- Communications Officer
Institute Communications
Email
Steven.gagliano@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000