Campus Gets Spooky for Halloween
If you’re looking for Halloween fun or just a way to unwind, stop by one of these campus events this week.
A student holds onto a pumpkin in preparation for the annual School of Physics Pumpkin Drop in 2018
Oct 25, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
It’s Homecoming week at Georgia Tech, but with Halloween coming this weekend, there are other ways to get into the spirit of the season.
If you’re looking for Halloween fun or just a way to unwind, stop by one of these campus events this week.
SCPC Homecoming Carnival
Tuesday, Oct. 26
Noon – 3 p.m.
Tech Green
Enjoy food, activities, and fun, including fall carnival treats like apple cider, caramel apples, fried Oreos, and popcorn! There will be inflatable games and the event is free.
HSOC Society Presents: HCON 2021
Tuesday, Oct. 26
5 p.m.
Old Civil Engineering Building Patio
The History and Sociology Society hosts its annual HCON historical costume event. Stop by for fun, costumes, and free food from the Halal Guys. RSVP is requested to account for food: visit
gatech.campuslabs.com/engage/event/7513210 .
Halloween Holla 5K
Oct. 27 – 31
At the Campus Recreation Center and Online
Though advanced registration is sold out, participants can still don a costume and participate virtually all week long. The course will run along the newly-refurbished Tyler Brown Pi Mile trail on campus.
Neuroscience Paint and Sip
Wednesday, Oct. 27
6 – 7 p.m.
Room 098, Weber SST III
The Neuroscience Club hosts a brain-themed paint and sip event. Attendees will paint a neuro-themed piece of art and enjoy “brain juice.”
RSVP to attend .
Kwaidan
Film Screening
Wednesday, Oct. 27
6 – 8 p.m.
Room 115, Swann Building
The Japanese program in the School of Modern Languages will celebrate Halloween with a showing of
Kwaidan , a horror anthology based on four well-known Japanese ghost stories. Two stories from the anthology (about an hour and a half) will be shown. There will also be a trivia contest on the movie and general Japanese horror trivia following the film. The winner will receive a box of Japanese candy.
Crafting With the Women’s Resource Center
Thursday, Oct. 28
11 am. – 3 p.m.
LGBTQIA Resource Center
The Women’s and LGBTQIA Resource Centers host a crafting event and Harry Potter movie marathon all day on Thursday.
Wicked Design and Pumpkin Ramble
Thursday, Oct. 28
6 – 8:30 p.m.
West Architecture Courtyard
Design a mask or costume or carve a pumpkin at this event from the School of Industrial Design.
SCPC Presents: Scratches, Scars, and Scabs!
Thursday, Oct. 28
7:30 – 11 p.m.
Midtown V, Exhibition Hall
Take a dive into Halloween makeup and special effects. All supplies will be provided, but attendees must register for a ticket at
bit.ly/campustickets . Wearing your spooky costume is encouraged.
TV Marathon
Friday, Oct. 29
9 a.m. – 4 p.m.
LGBTQIA Resource Center
The LGBTQIA Resource Center will show
Stranger Things
(or another spooky TV show) all day on Friday. Stop by the center in the Smithgall Student Services (Flag) Building.
Trick or Tree Tour
Sunday, Oct 31
1 – 2 p.m.
Einstein Statue at Tech Green
Trailblazers hosts a Halloween-themed walk around campus to learn about the beautiful trees in our own backyard.
RSVP on Engage.
Night at the Haunted Mansion
Sunday, Oct. 31
7 p.m.
The Historic Academy of Medicine
Join SCPC at the Historic Academy of Medicine for a night of frights. Come in your best Halloween costume and be spooked in the haunted maze and escape rooms, go trick-or-treating, and participate in a costume contest. Tickets are free but required; reserve a ticket at
bit.ly/campustickets .
Pumpkin Drop
Friday, Nov. 5
3 – 4 p.m.
Howey Physics Building (and streamed online at
twitch.tv/gatechsps )
The Society of Physics Students (SPS) hosts its annual Pumpkin Drop, where pumpkins are dunked in liquid nitrogen and dropped off the top of the Howey Physics Building. The event is free and no RSVP is required — drop by the outside of Howey to see frozen and glitter-filled pumpkins explode and learn about the science and physics behind the drops.
You can also
purchase a pumpkin
to be decorated, carved, and frozen in liquid nitrogen or frozen fruit. All pumpkin sales support SPS programming and activities.
Additional Images
Contact
Kristen Bailey
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000