Campus Police Emphasize Education, Enforcement of Micro-Mobility Vehicles
The department’s plan addresses the increase in the number of motor vehicles, micro-mobility vehicles, and pedestrians traversing through and around the Georgia Tech campus, with a goal of reducing the number and severity of accidents.
Student Rides a Scooter on Campus
Jan 25, 2023
— Atlanta, GA
As Georgia Tech’s campus community grows and evolves, and as the number of alternative transportation methods increases, campus streets and sidewalks are now filled with cars, pedestrians, cyclists, scooters — even electric unicycles.
Pursuing its mission of maintaining a safe and secure campus for the entire community, the
Georgia Tech Police Department (GTPD)
is stepping up education and enforcement of violations among all user groups and modes of transit.
“As part of a broader plan, the enforcement is aimed at making campus a safer and more pedestrian-friendly place,” said Captain Marcus Walton.
The department’s plan addresses the increase in the number of motor vehicles, micro-mobility vehicles, and pedestrians traversing through and around the Georgia Tech campus, with a goal of reducing the number and severity of accidents. It is part of a collaborative partnership between GTPD and the City of Atlanta’s Solicitor’s Office and follows a sustained increase in the number and severity of accidents over the past year.
GTPD has recently purchased 38 lighted pedestrian crosswalk signs and 14 radar speed detection signs that have been installed in strategic locations around campus. Officers will begin by issuing traffic warnings and collaborating with campus groups, including Starter Bikes and the Bicycle Infrastructure Improvement Committee, to promote safe ridership and even distribute safety equipment such as lights and helmets.
Following the educational campaign, which began this week, GTPD will implement targeted enforcement efforts and begin issuing citations using City of Atlanta ordinances. They will monitor and adapt enforcement efforts to determine if the plan is effective in reducing accidents on campus. GTPD is also working with Planning, Design, and Constriction on long-term infrastructure changes for campus that will continue to improve pedestrian and rider safety.
GTPD defines micro-mobility vehicles as bicycles, electric bicycles, electric scooters, and electric skateboards. For the safety and concern for those riding micro-mobility vehicles, GTPD asks that everyone wear the appropriate safety gear and follow all traffic laws and safety rules. State of Georgia law considers bicycles and electric scooters to be vehicles while in operation. Learn more about
rules of the road and safety tips from Georgia Tech Parking and Transportation , and review the campus
Bicycle and Personal Mobility Devices Use Policy .
Students, faculty, and staff are also encouraged to
register their micro-mobility vehicles with GTPD . Registration is free and allows GTPD to contact owners in the event that a device is recovered after being lost or stolen.
Reviewing the rules of the road:
Bicycles and scooters must obey all traffic laws and sidewalks.
Motorized vehicles may not be driven or ridden on the sidewalks.
Vehicles must yield to all pedestrians in crosswalks.
Pedestrians must use the crosswalks.
Park all scooters responsibly.
Additional Images
Related links
Bicycle and Personal Mobility Device Resources
Bicycle and Personal Mobility Devices Use Policy
Property and Bicycle Registration
Contact
Kristen Bailey
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000