Campus Events Abound for Ethics Week
Ethics Week returns this year with a focus on navigating ethics at Georgia Tech and beyond.
Ethics Week 2022
Oct 28, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
Ethics Week returns this year with a focus on navigating ethics at Georgia Tech and beyond. One of
Georgia Tech’s core values , “We act ethically,” guides our priorities every day, and while ethics is a year-round priority, Ethics Week puts a spotlight on all the various ways our campus engages in ethical decision making.
This year’s events, taking place Nov. 7 – 11, will be a mix of scheduled online presentations and in-person events. Campus experts and guest speakers will join the
Office of Ethics and Compliance
to showcase ethics in a variety of ways.
“Ethics Week is a great opportunity to highlight the incredible experts across the Institute who can offer perspectives about the importance of ethical decision-making in all that we do,” said Danette Joslyn-Gaul, general counsel and vice president for Ethics, Compliance, and Legal Affairs. “Although Ethics Week is just one week, I hope that it will offer the campus community a greater connection and understanding of the Institute’s core values, as well as identifying resources and pathways for support to apply these lessons into the world every day.”
Below is a list of a few highlighted events.
Campus Clash – Gameshow Extravaganza
Monday, Nov. 7, from 1 to 2 p.m. in the Atlantic Theater of the John Lewis Student Center, campus leaders will go head-to-head playing a familiar family feud game with a Georgia Tech twist to kick off Ethics Week. Participants include:
President Ángel Cabrera
Executive Vice President for Research Chaouki Abdallah
Interim Executive Vice President for Administration and Finance Mike Shannon
Vice President for Student Engagement and Well-Being Luoluo Hong
Vice President and Chief Human Resources Officer Skye Duckett
Alumni Association President Dene Sheheane
College of Engineering Dean Raheem Beyah
Georgia Tech Library Dean Leslie Sharp
Student Government Association President Rohan Shohani
RSVP for the event.
Attendees will receive Ethics Week giveaways and enjoy snacks.
Hybrid Work and Building Community: Intersections With Ethical Decision Making
Ethics Week Keynote
On Wednesday, Nov. 9. from 11 a.m. to noon, keynote speaker Steve Cohn will share insights about expectations and best practices for building community with a hybrid workforce to support ethical decision making and prevent employee alienation. Cohn helps people and companies have better, more productive relationships. This event will take place in the Atlantic Theater of the John Lewis Student Center.
RSVP for the event.
Attendees will receive Ethics Week giveaways.
Authorship: Promising Practices and Challenges
Join Georgia Tech faculty on Wednesday, Nov. 9, from 2 to 3 p.m. virtually to discuss authorship norms and strategies for avoiding authorship disagreements. Research is core to Georgia Tech's mission, and those engaged in research collaborations may at times have to navigate complexities connected to authorship.
RSVP for the event.
Moderated by: Assistant Vice Provost for Advocacy and Conflict Resolution Kyla Turpin Ross
Panelists:
Director of Graduate Research Ethics Programs Jason Borenstein
School of Biological Sciences Associate Professor Ingeborg Schmidt-Krey
Professor and Vice President for Interdisciplinary Research Julia Kubanek
Protecting Data: A Conversation With Georgia Tech and Coca-Cola
From classified research to secret recipes — it's all about protecting data from outside sources. Join insider threat protection managers from Georgia Tech and Coca-Cola on Thursday, Nov. 10, from 1 to 2 p.m. as they discuss challenges and success with protecting the information and resources that keep their institutions running.
RSVP for this in-person event
in the Atlantic Theater of the John Lewis Student Center.
Participants who attend three Ethics Week events will get a long-sleeve t-shirt while supplies last. All in-person events will have giveaways and light refreshments. For a full list of events, chances to win door prizes, and to register, visit
ethicsfirst.gatech.edu/ethicsweek . The University System of Georgia (USG) is also hosting events, and information is included on the schedule.
This year, Ethics Week coincides with the
annual online compliance training
that is required of all employees. This campaign and training prepare Georgia Tech employees to exercise sound ethical judgment, act with integrity and transparency, and understand their responsibility for the USG’s and Institute's policies and compliance obligations.
Learn more about ethics at Georgia Tech at
ethicsfirst.gatech.edu .
Additional Images
Related links
Ethics and Compliance
Contact
Morgan Miller
Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000