Campus Police Department Assembling Care Packages
There are many ways the Tech community can give back this holiday season, including contributing to the Georgia Tech Police Department's Care Package Drive, supporting Klemis Kitchen, or donating to GTRI's Toys-for-Tots Drive.
Toiletries and food collected for GTPD's Care Package Drive.
Dec 01, 2023
For the seventh year, t he Georgia Tech Police Department (GTPD) is organizing a care package drive to assist those in need near campus. Last year, with the help of the campus community, GTPD packaged and distributed more than 150 care packages to individuals experiencing homelessness in and around the Tech community.
“For the last six years we have surpassed our goal for the number of packages to create, so this year we will not set a goal. Our only mission is to fulfill our purpose of generously sharing with those in need,” said Lt. Jessica Howard, GTPD. “As we approach the holiday season, please remember those who find themselves in less fortunate circumstances than ourselves.” GTPD will fill gallon-size bags with travel size toiletries, snacks, and food items.
Collection bins are in the police department’s lobby and patrol suite at 965 Hemphill Ave. NW, Atlanta, Georgia. If you would like a collection bin to place in your department, please email
outreach@police.gatech.edu . Items will be collected until Friday, Dec. 15.
Items needed include:
Toiletries/miscellaneous: hand sanitizer, lotion, wipes, deodorant, lip balm, hand warmers, gloves, beanie caps, socks, and feminine hygiene products.
Snack/food items: tuna packets, noodles, granola bars, mints, fruit cups, Vienna sausages, jerky, and crackers.
Other Ways to Give Back
Become an Angel of the Month in support of Klemis Kitchen.
Student Engagement and Well-Being is working with
STAR (Students’ Temporary Assistance and Resources) to support one of its student programs,
Klemis Kitchen , Georgia Tech’s on-campus food bank. By becoming an Angel of the Month, your department can provide essential items like canned and dry goods, which go a long way in ensuring that students are never forced to skip a meal.
For inquiries and to pledge your support, visit
star.studentlife.gatech.edu
(the form is at the bottom of the webpage) or contact the director of STAR, Steve Fazenbaker, at
steve.fazenbaker@gatech.edu . Donate to GTRI’s Toys-for-Tots Drive.
The Georgia Tech Research Institute (GTRI) is collecting toys for its annual Toys-for-Tots Drive. Until Dec. 20, donation boxes are located in GTRI common spaces for the collection of unopened and unwrapped toys. The purpose of the drive is to participate in community outreach for the goodwill of the Atlanta community.
Donation boxes can be found at: ATC Buildings 100 and 200, B11 Cobb County Research Facility, Coda Building, GTRI HQ Building, GPB Building, and the 271 Building.
If you have questions, contact Mike Curtis at
mike.curtis@gtri.gatech.edu .
Additional Images
Contact
Victor Rogers Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000