Can We Get Along? Resilience Can Help Promote Civil Discourse
Suggestions for having a civil discussion with someone who doesn't share your views.
Oct 27, 2020
— Atlanta, GA
For a variety of reasons 2020 has been stressful, frightening, and just plain exhausting. Because of the coronavirus pandemic, some of us have lost loved ones. Many are working from home, and others are unemployed. Wildfires ravaged the west coast as hurricanes and tornadoes battered the Southeast. Protests against racism and police brutality were held around the globe.
And, of course, there is next week’s election, which in some cases has pitted relatives and friends against each other.
At times it seems impossible to talk about politics and current events without ending in a shouting match and hurt feelings. Is it possible to have a civil discussion with someone who doesn’t share the same views?
“A need to focus on being right often leads to missed opportunities to understand one another,” said Tiffiny Hughes-Troutman, licensed psychologist and director of the
Center for Assessment, Referral, and Education (CARE)
at Georgia Tech. “Seeking to understand another’s viewpoint does not equate with agreeing with them; it promotes psychological flexibility and a growth mindset.”
Psychological flexibility means recognizing and adapting to various situational demands, and being proactive instead of reactive in acknowledging and owning one’s response.
“It is natural to want to assert our own beliefs, but also very healthy to accept that someone else may hold a different opinion despite your efforts to change them,” Hughes-Troutman said.
Sonia Alvarez-Robinson, executive director of Georgia Tech Strategic Consulting, agrees.
“This time of disagreement and discourse is challenging all of us,” she said. “But we need to keep our focus on what unites us at Georgia Tech — our common mission to develop leaders who advance technology and improve the human condition. Regardless of the outcome of the election, our mission remains solid. No matter which candidate we support, vote for, or agree with, our students are our first priority and we need to keep that front and center.”
Alvarez-Robinson said vigorous disagreement with another person can often feel like an adverse event, and if prolonged it becomes a chronic stressor.
“We often have physiological responses to being in conflict with another person — our heart rate goes up, we might have pain in our gut, we might have skin irritations, or even have trouble breathing. These are all signs of stress and distress,” she said.
Stressors caused by conflict can also have a negative impact on personal and professional relationships.
“Research has shown that diversity brings richness, new ideas, insights, and growth that does not happen in a homogeneous group,” said Alvarez-Robinson, who has a doctorate in human and organizational behavior. “Yet studies have also shown that diversity of values, especially when they are deeply rooted, can make productivity and group efficacy more difficult.”
Alvarez-Robinson is the principal empowerment officer of Tech’s Resilience Employee Resource Group. She suggests using resilience as a skill to help grow from the difficulties experienced through discourse. “Resilience can help groups manage diversity of values while also healing from hurt that is created when people become emotionally charged in their disagreements.”
Alvarez-Robinson suggests employing the following coping strategies during this stressful time:
Quiet your mind . We are bombarded with messages, information, stories, opinions, and our mind is trying to make sense of all of it. Use meditation and other mindfulness techniques to quiet the noise that can keep you from thinking clearly.
Keep Reality in Perspective . Uncertainty can cause anxiety and fear, which can lead us to create our own worst imaginings of what will happen next. It is important to discern between fear that is imagined and danger that is real. Here we need to prepare for the worst but expect the best.
Engage in self-care . Heightened negative emotions can make us feel beaten down and depleted in our energy. We need to rejuvenate, recharge, and restore our positive emotions by taking care of ourselves. Get out into nature, manage media consumption, set boundaries, and say kind things to ourselves.
Put worries in their place.
There is a lot to worry about, but worrying can only be productive if we put it into its place. List the things that you are worried about and put them into one of three buckets: what I can’t control (then you have to release it), what I can partially control (then figure out what you will do about it), and what I totally control (then make a plan to take action to resolve it).
Hughes-Troutman added, “It is essential to acknowledge our feelings and aim for a balanced and healthy perspective to prevent stress levels from escalating.”
Additional Images
Contact
Victor Rogers
Institute Communications
Email
victor.rogers@comm.gatech.edu
Additional information
No matter your role on campus, there are opportunities for dialogue and community support:
Resources for students
Student resources are available through the
Center for Assessment, Referral, and Education (CARE) , which will be adding drop-in hours on Wednesday, Nov. 4, from 8 a.m. - noon and 1 - 4:30 p.m. and Thursday, Nov. 5, from 9 a.m. - noon. To access CARE services, please call 404-894-3498 and you will be connected with a counselor.
The
Veterans Resource Center
is holding an
end of semester check-in
for student veterans on Tuesday, Nov. 3, at 11 a.m.
The
Counseling Center
is highlighting and expanding its
Let’s Talk
service during this busy week. To participate, select a convenient time, and email the associated counselor. The counselor will respond to confirm the date and time, and will supply a private link for the meeting.
The
LGBTQIA Resource Center
will host a
coffee hour for Tech students   on Wednesday, Nov. 4, at noon. A Georgia Tech email address is required to register.
The
Women's Resource Center
will host
She Should Run , discussing the legacies of women in public leadership, at 5 p.m. on Monday, Nov. 9.
Resources for academic instructors
Should we address the coming election on the days leading up to Nov. 3 and if so, how? The Center for Teaching and Learning hosts
Teaching Amid Election-Related Stressors
on
Thursday, Oct. 29, 11 a.m. – 12:30 p.m.
Resources for faculty and staff
The
Resilience Employee Resource Group
empowers employees who have experienced, or are experiencing, major life challenges by increasing their self-efficacy.
Sometimes a person just needs a little support as they work through a challenging time. For staff and faculty, that resource is the
Employee Assistance Program .
Resources for all
On Thursday, Nov. 5, at 11 a.m., School of Public Policy Associate Professor Richard Barke will moderate  Election 2020: Looking Back, Looking Forward , a forum for taking stock of our political and cultural climate and discussing how we can move forward together.
The staff within
Health Initiatives
offer guidance, education, and community for those who want to improve their well-being. Join their upcoming event,
Finding Resilience in Stressful Times , on Wednesday, Nov. 4, at 2 p.m.
One of the best stress relievers is getting some exercise. Those looking for a new routine or change of pace might consider the
Campus Recreation Center ’s
virtual fitness classes .
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000