Cassie Mitchell Receives 2019 Award from the American Neurological Association
Awards recognize work in the genetics of Alzheimer’s disease, the microbiome and stroke, clinical trial design, and more
Cassie Mitchell, assistant professor in the Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering at Georgia Tech and Emory University.
Aug 22, 2019
— Atlanta, GA
The American Neurological Association (ANA), the professional organization representing the nation’s top academic neurologists and neuroscientists, has announced the winners of its
2019 scientific awards , to be presented at the 144th ANA Annual Meeting, to be held at the Marriott St. Louis Grand, October 13-15, 2019. The awards recognize leaders in academic neurology and neuroscience who have exemplified excellence in research, teaching, and clinical practice across the gamut of clinical neurology and neuroscience disciplines.
“This year’s awardees reflect the cutting–edge research being done at every career stage across neurology and neuroscience,” said
David M. Holtzman , MD, president of the ANA and Andrew B. and Gretchen P. Jones Professor and Chairman, Dept. of Neurology at the Washington University School of Medicine. “The pace of advances we’re seeing in translational neuroscience and the neurobiology of disease are extraordinary. We hope the gains will inspire the new generation of physician scientists to pursue careers that combine research and teaching with clinical practice. There has never been a more exciting time to work in academic neurology.”
Each year, the ANA Annual Meeting convenes more than 900 of the nation's top academic neurologists and neuroscientists to share updates and late-breaking research on the diseases that affect more than 100 million Americans each year including stroke, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, neuromuscular disorders, headache, traumatic brain and spinal cord injuries, epilepsy, multiple sclerosis and more.
Derek Denny-Brown Young Neurological Scholars
The Derek Denny-Brown Young Neurological Awards are clinical awards given each year during the Annual Meeting to new members of the association who have achieved significant stature in neurological research, and who show promise and will continue making major contributions to the field of neurology.
The Derek Denny-Brown Young Neurological Scholar Award in Neuroscience went to
Cassie S. Mitchell , Ph.D., Georgia Institute of Technology. Her presentation title: Literature-based discovery facilitates predictive medicine for neurological disease.
Full list of ANA 2019
winners .
Additional Images
Contact
Walter Rich
Email
wrich@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000