Celebrating Independence Day in Atlanta
As the July 4 holiday approaches, everyone in the Georgia Tech community can look forward to a day off on Monday, July 4.
Fireworks at Centennial Olympic Park as seen from Bobby Dodd Stadium on July 4, 2012. Photo courtesy of Danny Karnik.
Jun 28, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
As the July 4 holiday approaches, everyone in the Georgia Tech community can look forward to a day off on Monday, July 4. For students, a day without classes on Tuesday, July 5, offers an extended break.
For those staying in town during the long weekend, the holiday offers many opportunities to celebrate at little or no cost.
Fantastic Fourth at Stone Mountain Park
July 1–5
An admission fee of $10 gets attendees a showing of the Lasershow Spectacular, followed by fireworks. Parking is $20.
Fourth of July on the Roof
Saturday, July 2
Ponce City Market will host a celebration on The Roof from 11 a.m. to midnight. Entertainment, food, and fireworks will all be part of the celebration. The event is limited to ages 21 and up beginning at 5 p.m. Admission is $30.
Look Up Atlanta
Sunday, July 3
A fireworks celebration at Centennial Olympic Park will take place Sunday, July 3. General admission is $10 and benefits the Centennial Olympic Park beautification fund.
Peachtree Road Race
Monday, July 4
Though registration is closed for the world’s largest 10K, spectators can enjoy the event along Peachtree Street and 10th Street just a few blocks from Tech’s campus. Volunteers are also still wanted for the event.
Chamblee Concert and Fireworks
Monday, July 4
A children’s bike parade, free concert, and fireworks will take place in Keswick Park. All events are free, and the Chamblee MARTA location offers convenient transit.
Decatur Fireworks, Concert, and Parade
Monday, July 4
All are welcome to wear festive attire and join the July 4 parade in downtown Decatur. The parade is followed by a concert, with fireworks beginning at the courthouse around 9 p.m. All events are free.
Independence Day With the Braves
July 4–6
The Atlanta Braves host a series against the St. Louis Cardinals at Truist Park. Fireworks will take place after the game on July 4.
Additional Images
Contact
Kristen Bailey
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000