Center for Student Engagement Introduces The Celebrating Student Leadership Project
The Center for Student Engagement has a new initiative, the Celebrating Student Leadership project, which intends to highlight and tell the story of individual students who are committed to the mission of their organization.
Dec 19, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
The mission of the Center for Student Engagement, a department within the division of  Student Engagement and Well-Being , includes celebrating the contribution of Registered Student Organization (RSO) members and leaders. The Center for Student Engagement has a new initiative, the Celebrating Student Leadership project, which intends to highlight and tell the story of individual students who are committed to the mission of their organization and those who exemplify the spirit of progress and service. Thirty students will be chosen by nomination and application. The submissions will be reviewed by a panel including faculty, staff, and students using a three-pronged rubric: 1) impact of campus engagement, 2) commitment to the mission of their respective organization, and 3) commitment to their peers. With over 500 activeRegistered Student Organizations, RSO’s reflect the innovative, entrepreneurial, and self-starting attributes of Yellow Jackets. They comprise an essential part of student life on campus, and contribute to community, connection, and camaraderie.
The students selected for the 2023 Celebrating Student Leadership project will have special profiles created and will be recognized in the following ways:
Photo banner hung on campus on the Experiential Pathway from April to August 2023
Bio and profile shared on the  Celebrating Student Leadership website
Recognition at Georgia Tech’s annual Up with the White and Gold awards ceremony (April 10)
Students selected will receive email communication by Friday, January 27. The congratulatory email will include details on how to schedule a profile photo on Tuesday, February 7.
Nomination Process:
Each nomination will include two portions, either of which can be submitted first: 1) a Faculty/Staff nomination and 2) a student application.
Faculty/Staff Nomination: Faculty and Staff can nominate a student using the nomination form. The student will receive an email stating they have been nominated with directions to complete the application.
Student Application: Students can complete the application and then request a nomination by visiting  studentengagement.gatech.edu/student-leadership
Faculty and staff are strongly encouraged to recognize worthy students through this program by submitting one or more nominations by January 17, 2023. This is one way that we can demonstrate our values that ‘Students are our top priority.’
Additional Images
Contact
engage @gatech.edu
Email
engage@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000