Change in Leadership Announced for the Enterprise Innovation Institute
Stephen Fleming will be stepping down as the vice president and executive director
Oct 12, 2015
— Atlanta, GA
Stephen Fleming will be stepping down as the vice president and executive director of Georgia Tech's Enterprise Innovation Institute (EI 2 ), as of December 31, 2015. He made this announcement during a staff meeting earlier today. According to Executive Vice President for Research Steve Cross, EI 2
has been a driving force in the growth of Georgia Tech's innovation ecosystem, helping expand the Institute's economic impact and job creation for the state. "We are grateful for Stephen's seven years of service in this capacity and his support to EI 2 , Georgia Tech and Georgia," said Cross. “EI 2
has experienced remarkable success across all of its programs in recent years under Stephen’s leadership. Georgia Tech is grateful to him for his extraordinary contributions and we all wish him continued success in his next endeavors,” Cross said. Chris Downing, EI 2
associate vice president, has agreed to serve as the interim director during the leadership transition as a national search for a new director begins. The Enterprise Innovation Institute is Georgia Tech’s business extension organization and serves as the primary vehicle to achieve Georgia Tech’s goal of expanded local, regional and global outreach.
Additional Images
Related links
Enterprise Innovation Institute
Contact
Laura Diamond Institute Communications 404-894-6016
Additional information
Recent Highlights from EI 2
and ATDC: Launched the Financial Technology accelerator at ATDC and facilitated the
$1 million gift from Worldpay to Georgia Tech
used to fund the three-year program.
The Association of Public and Land-grant Universities (APLU) gave the Georgia Institute of Technology its “Innovation” award as part of the
2014 Innovation and Economic Prosperity Universities (IEP) Awards . Tech was recognized for its technology-based focus in its economic development efforts.
The Association of University Research Parks (AURP) named Technology Square its
“2014 Outstanding Research Park Award”
winner.
The U.S. Department of Commerce awarded the Georgia Institute of Technology a $500,000
i6 Challenge grant
to support a sweeping innovation and entrepreneurship initiative in Athens, Augusta, and downtown Atlanta.
New corporate connections with EI 2
via the innovation centers that have opened at Tech Square, including Coca-Cola Enterprises, Home Depot, and Southern Co.
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000