Charitable Campaign is Underway
The 2021-22 campaign runs through Nov. 16.
Sep 28, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
When it comes to charitable giving, every dollar donated to the Georgia State Charitable Contributions Program (GASCCP) helps a worthy cause. The 2021-22 campaign runs through Nov. 16.
The GASCCP is a benefit for State of Georgia and University System employees that allows contributions to the charity of choice through payroll deductions or a one-time donation.
Faculty and staff have several options for contributing. Giving online through OneUSG Connect is the preferred method because it is confidential, secure, and simple to use.
To contribute:
Log in to OneUSG Connect and select “Make SCCP Contribution” on the “State Charitable Contributions Program” button in the upper left of the Employee Self Service screen.
Select “Make Charitable Campaign Pledge” and follow the instructions.
Choose “Payroll Deduction” to set up the amount you choose to pledge in equal installments. Deductions will begin in January 2022.
If you would rather download a pledge form, you can complete it and submit with your check to your unit ambassador or to Erick Maxwell, the campaign chair, at mail code 0866.
Over the past four years of the campaign, an average of 717 Georgia Tech employees have participated in the campaign. As a testament to the generosity of its faculty and staff, Georgia Tech has earned the Governor’s Cup 13 years in a row for having the highest contribution per employee among state institutions of its size.
“I am proud to work at an institution with such a strong giving history,” said Serena Wallace, last year’s Charitable Campaign chair. “The generosity of staff and faculty in the midst of their own hardships shows what a caring campus community we have.”
There are more than 700 local, state, and national nonprofit organizations to which employees can contribute. Additional details about the campaign can be found at
charitable.gatech.edu .
Additional Images
Contact
Victor Rogers
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000