Chick-fil-A to Open Innovation Center in Tech Square
Chick-fil-A is the 15th company to open an innovation center in Tech Square.
The Georgia Tech Foundation has reached an agreement to purchase the historic Biltmore on West Peachtree Street from an affiliate of Novare Group, officials announced June 13.
Mar 08, 2017
— Atlanta, GA
Chick-fil-A will open an Innovation Satellite Office in Georgia Tech’s Tech Square at the historic Biltmore.
The new office, along with the ongoing intern recruitment program that will be housed there, is part of a larger partnership with Georgia Tech, and emphasizes Chick-fil-A’s commitment to innovation.
“This new facility will provide a dedicated space for Chick-fil-A to collaborate with the bright minds of Georgia Tech and develop technology solutions that will benefit our customers,” said Mike Erbrick, CIO and vice president of Information Technology for Chick-fil-A. “Our founder, Truett Cathy, was a true innovator, and the Innovation Satellite Office is one of the ways we’re continuing his legacy.”
The 6,000-square-foot space is scheduled to open this summer. Chick-fil-A will work with faculty and students to explore design, innovation and development projects among various majors and disciplines.
“Georgia Tech and Chick-fil-A enjoy a long and collaborative relationship, including employing our undergraduates as interns and hiring our graduates. We are delighted to welcome them to Georgia Tech’s Biltmore to enhance our partnership and expand the opportunities for interaction with our students, faculty and staff,” President G.P. “Bud” Peterson said. “Chick-fil-A joins a prestigious and growing list of corporations that are opening innovation centers in Tech Square to take advantage of the talent and technologies at Georgia Tech and the exciting innovation ecosystem that we have created here.”
Chick-fil-A is the 15 th
company to open an innovation center in Tech Square. The centers represent a diverse range of industries and a
full list of participants can be found here .
The innovation centers at Tech Square don’t just benefit their home corporations. The centers interact with startups in Tech Square and across Midtown. Georgia Tech students intern at these centers and Institute faculty collaborate with the center staff.
Chick-fil-A is among the founding corporate members contributing to
Engage , a new national membership-driven accelerator and venture fund targeting high-tech startups. Georgia Tech's Advanced Technology Development Center will provide programming and other services for the
Atlanta-based Engage .
Additional Images
Contact
For media inquiries about the innovation centers in Georgia Tech’s Tech Square please contact Laura Diamond, laura.diamond@gatech.edu
For other information about the innovation centers, please contact Greg King, greg.king@gatech.edu
Email
laura.diamond@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000