Cindy Hope Named Associate Vice President for Research Administration
Cindy Hope has been named Georgia Tech’s associate vice president for Research Administration.
Cindy Hope
Jul 19, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
Cynthia “Cindy” Hope has been named Georgia Tech’s associate vice president for Research Administration in the Office of the Executive Vice President for Research, effective immediately.
As a 25-year higher education veteran, Hope was the assistant vice president for research and director of the Office of Sponsored Programs at the University of Alabama before joining Georgia Tech in 2019. At Georgia Tech, she serves as the Office of Sponsored Programs’ director of government and not-for-profit contracts and grants. Hope previously served on the board of the Council on Governmental Relations and chaired its costing policies committee. She is a former chair and remains on the executive committee of the Federal Demonstration Partnership, and she served six years on the National Science Foundation’s business and operations advisory committee.
“I am so pleased that Cindy will officially assume the role of associate vice president and I thank her for the outstanding job she has done in the interim role,” said Chaouki Abdallah, executive vice president for Research at Georgia Tech. “Her strategic guidance of sponsored programs and research administration will be critical to our success as our $1.2 billion research enterprise continues to grow.”
In her new role, Hope will focus on overseeing all operations of research administration and sponsored programs, identifying sponsored research opportunities to grow the Georgia Tech research enterprise. She will ensure Georgia Tech stays in compliance with state and federal rules and regulations. Hope will also provide thought leadership and guidance to all Institute research administration matters, ensuring Georgia Tech remains a top-tier research university.
Hope will continue to work closely with the colleges, interdisciplinary research institutes, and centers, building on her already solid foundation.
“I am excited about this opportunity to use the knowledge I’ve gained during my many years of experience as a research administrator,” said Hope. “We have a great Research Administration team and with the support we have received from Institute leadership, we will identify opportunities to reduce administrative burden on our researchers, staff, and students, while maintaining compliance with sponsor and Institute policies. It is a great time to be part of research and research administration at Georgia Tech.”
Hope succeeds Rebecca Caravati who, after 25 years, retired in 2021.
Written by Georgia Parmelee
Additional Images
Contact
Georgia Parmelee, Director of Research Communications
Email
georgia.parmelee@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000