College of Sciences Spotlights Exemplary Students with 2021 Awards
Six students gain special recognition for accomplishments, research in a variety of disciplines
May 07, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
One College of Sciences student is a rising fourth-year, but she spent some of her non-research hours helping incoming first year students navigate the newness of Georgia Tech. Another became the Georgia Tech hockey team’s first woman player in school history. (Yes, Georgia Tech has a
hockey team .) Yet another is helping a professor build an organic meteor database.
The six College of Sciences students honored for end-of-school-year awards and scholarships offer a wide variety of accomplishments. Join us in congratulating these winners of the 2021 College of Sciences Student Awards:
2021 A. Joyce Nickelson and John C. Sutherland Undergraduate Research Award
Presented to a student studying physics and mathematics.
Endowment gift of Jen Nickelson and John Sutherland.
Luojia Zhang
Graduating Spring 2021, Physics and Mathematics double major
Research with  Zhigang Jiang  and  Carlos Sá de Melo , School of Physics
“Landau quantization in tilted Weyl semimetals with broken symmetry," Journal of Applied Physics 129, 105107 (2021).
Presented research at  American Physical Society , March 2021
2021 Roger M. Wartell and Stephen E. Brossette Award
Presented to a student who studies at the physics/math-biology interface. Endowment gift of Stephen Brossette.
Sophia Wiesenfeld
Rising fourth year student, Chamblee Charter High School graduate
Biology major
Research with  Brian Hammer , School of Biological Sciences, and  Peter Yunker , School of Physics.
“Glucose confers protection to  Escherichia coli  against contact killing by  Vibrio cholera ,”   Sci. Rep.  2021,  11 , 2935.
PLUS (Peer-Led Undergraduate Study ) leader, intro to physics; teaching assistant, evolutionary biology;  GT1000  team leader
2021 Robert A. Pierotti Memorial Scholarship
Presented to a top graduating senior in the College. Endowment gift of the family and friends of former dean Robert Pierotti
Kalen Patton
Chattahoochee High School
Mathematics and Computer Science double major
Research with  Lutz Warnke , School of Mathematics  –  “Prague dimension of random graphs,”  arXiv: 2011.09459v1
Research with  Prasad Tetali , Schools of Mathematics and Computer Science  –  “Markov Chain-Based Sampling for Exploring RNA Secondary Structure…”   Math. Comput. Appl.  2020,  25 , 67.
Runner-up,  Love Family Foundation Scholarship
2021 Mehta Phingbodhipakkiya Memorial Scholarship
Presented to a top junior in the College of Sciences. Endowment gift of Maranee Phing
Jennifer Kim
South Forsyth High School graduate
Biochemistry major
Research with  Amanda Stockton , School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, to develop an organic meteorite database
Works with Loren Williams in Georgia Tech’s  Center for the Origin of Life (COOL)
2021 Virginia C. and Herschel V. Clanton Jr. Scholarship
Presented to a top pre-medical student in the College of Sciences.
Endowment gift of Herschel V. Clanton.
Suraj Modi
Mountain View High School, Lawrenceville, graduate
Biology major
Research with  Frank Rosenzweig , School of Biological Sciences
Studying the integration of nutrient-sensing and pheromone-sensing pathways in  Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Ambassador,  Stamps Health Services ; Biology Student Advisory Council
2021 Cynthia L. Bossart and James Efron Scholarship
Presented to a top out-of-state junior in the College of Sciences.
Endowment gift of Cynthia Bossart and James Efron.
Eva Erickson
Rising third year student from Eagan, Minnesota
Physics major
Research with  Daniel Goldman , School of Physics
Presented “ Centipede Locomotion on Complex Terrain,” American Physical Society, 2021 ; and Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology, 2021
“Tech Hockey adds first ever female player to roster,”   Technique , September 18, 2019
Additional Images
Contact
Renay San Miguel
Communications Officer II/Science Writer
College of Sciences
404-894-5209
Email
renay.san@cos.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000