Commemorating Memorial Day in Atlanta
This weekend, to remember those who lost their lives in service, events in the Tech community and around Atlanta have been planned for the Memorial Day holiday.
The new Veterans Resource Center opened in October 2020. President Cabrera, right, and donors to the center attended the opening.
May 27, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
This weekend, to remember those who lost their lives in service, events in the Tech community and around Atlanta have been planned for the Memorial Day holiday.
On May 27, the Veterans Resource Center will host the Memorial Day Recognition from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. in the new Veterans Resource Center, located in the BioTech Quad. There will be displays and information about Tech’s military history. Contact David Ross at
dross25@gatech.edu
for information on attending
For more information, visit
veterans.gatech.edu/memorial-day .
Events around Atlanta:
Jazz Sunday at Ebenezer
May 30, 1 p.m.
Ebenezer Baptist Church will hold a socially distanced outdoor jazz concert featuring Antonio Allen. For more information, visit
here .
Blue Star Museum Program
All summer long
Families of active military members can enjoy free admission at more than 2,000 venues nationwide, including 14 venues in the Atlanta metro area. Participating venues include children’s museums, art museums, history and science centers, zoos, and nature centers. For a list of venues in the Atlanta area, visit
here .
College Football Hall of Fame
Memorial Day Weekend
Active and retired military members can show an ID at the box office for free admission. Family members receive 20% off at the box office. For more information, visit
here .
Movies on the Lawn Along Lindbergh Drive
May 1 to July 31
Free movie screenings will take place weekly outdoors on the greenspace along Lindbergh Drive, around the Lindbergh MARTA station. Saturday, May 29, will feature a showing of
Good Morning, Vietnam . For more information, visit
here .
Alpharetta Arts Streetfest
Memorial Day Weekend, 9 a.m. – 5 p.m.
The Streetfest will feature more than 90 artists from across the U.S. Artists represent a wide variety of mediums including mixed media, photography, pottery, jewelry, textiles, glass, wood, metal, and paper art. Admission is free. For more information, visit
here .
Georgia Renaissance Festival
Through June 13, 10:30 a.m. – 6 p.m.
The festival will run through June 13, but for the Memorial Day weekend, active duty and retired military get in free, plus up to four family members for just $8 each. For more information, visit
here .
Sunday Funday Markets in West End
Through August 29, 1 – 5 p.m.
The markets will feature local artisans and businesses, and people can browse art, crafts, jewelry, handmade items, candles, soaps and lotions, and more. For more information, visit
here .
May Fair
Through Memorial Day weekend
Held at the Buford Corn Maze, this year the fair will include a carousel, magic shows, baby animals, and pony rides. For more information, visit
here .
Additional Images
Contact
Vanesa Vargas
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000