Computer Science Student Working With Some of Music's Top Names
Shaun Sharma is multitasking with a top Hollywood agency while finishing his degree
Sharma is an assistant at Hollywood agency William Morris Endeavor (WME), whose clients include Ben Affleck, Hugh Jackman, Whoopi Goldberg, and Adam Sandler.
Nov 04, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
Shaun Sharma makes the most of the 24 hours in each day.
He’s currently working to complete his undergraduate degree in computer science from Georgia Tech. When he’s not studying or completing assignments for one of the nation’s top computing programs, he’s a software engineering intern at American Express. And he’s also helping to represent some of the biggest names in Hollywood at one of America’s premier talent agencies.
How does he do it? “I keep a very organized calendar of all my daily meetings and classes and an organized to-do list of emails, assignments, and projects I need to complete.”
Sharma is an assistant at William Morris Endeavor (WME), whose clients include Robert DeNiro, Serena Williams, Taylor Swift, Kanye West, and scores of other celebrities. Sharma works in the firm’s Music Central operation, focusing on high-profile clients in the electronic dance music space including Martin Garrix, KYGO, Marshmello, and others.
This all started a few years ago at Music Midtown, an outdoor music festival held near campus at Piedmont Park in Atlanta. “It was one of the best experiences of my time here at Tech. I noticed how a crowd of thousands can come together and enjoy an event at such a large scale,” he said.
Sharma was inspired to respond to an ad to work at another music festival operating the software that controlled the lighting systems for the stage. After that, he was hooked. And, he says, music has been an important part of his journey at Tech as well.
“Like most students, music allows me to be passionate about the work that I'm doing and gives me the energy and motivation to go through my day. I'll have different playlists I use when preparing for an interview, doing homework, or just taking some time to relax,” he explained.
In 2020, Sharma organized the Alone Together Music Festival, a virtual event that drew more than 2.4 million views over 48 hours with stages on both the East and West Coasts, and he says his knowledge of technology has helped him create more meaningful and interactive experiences at these music events.
“I have been able to bridge the gaps and highlight things such as how lighting rigs at a live festival can interface with an artist's CDJs (compact disc jockeys), or feedback on an artist's demos while keeping in mind how it would play at a large festival.”
It was Sharma’s music festival work that caught the eye of the agency, and his tech prowess has also served him well in his work representing some of entertainment’s biggest names. He’s helped automate and digitize the contracting process for WME — a system that is often navigated by written sticky notes and folders full of papers. The contracts and stipulations they hold are critical in Hollywood and beyond.
“I am coming up with ideas and they see someone who is trying to move forward,” he said.
As Sharma finishes his final credits this semester, he doesn’t see himself slowing down any time soon. He plans to work as a software engineer, but will make time to expand his agency work and take an active role in musical artist management.
“I don't really consider my tasks for music as work. It's something I enjoy and would want to do in my free time anyway.”
Additional Images
Contact
Steven Norris
Institute Communications
snorris@gatech.edu
Email
snorris@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000