Creating Communities that Draw People and Business Under the New Workplace Model
56th Annual Basic Economic Development Course 2023 theme focuses on Placemaking and Economic Recovery
The 2023 BEDC keynote speakers include Eric Kronberg, founder of Kronberg Urbanists Architects, and Elizabeth Ward Williams, the firm’s director of urban design.
Jun 27, 2023
ATLANTA —
As communities move past the effects of COVID-19 and the economic turmoil stemming from the pandemic, economic development professionals are fully engaged in recovery.
The
56th Annual Georgia Tech Basic Economic Development Course
(BEDC) will arm these professionals with the tools and strategies needed to maximize opportunity and potential for local communities in a four-day course from August 28-31. ( Register:
http://tiny.cc/BEDC2023 )
The new realities of today’s workforce in a post-pandemic economy means communities must reimagine themselves in ways that make them more attractive to people as places to live and for businesses to operate.
Presented by Georgia Tech’s
Enterprise Innovation Institute
in collaboration with the
International Economic Development Council   and the  Georgia Economic Developers Association ,
this comprehensive course will explore the use of placemaking as an economic development tool to help professionals create quality places where people want to live and businesses believe they will thrive.
The 2023 theme is
Placemaking and Economic Recovery: Creating Communities Where People Want to Live and Businesses Want to Be.
Keynote speakers include
Eric Kronberg , founder of
Kronberg Urbanists Architects , and
Elizabeth Ward Williams , that firm’s director of urban design.
“We know the pandemic has changed the way we operate in a lot of ways with telecommuting and remote working being a fixed reality for business and job seekers,”
said Alan Durham, BEDC course director. With work-from-home or hybrid commuting schedules the norm, communities need to rethink how they create strategies and make them more appealing to potential residents and business investments, he said.
“Our course is designed to teach attendees how to maximize opportunities in this new reality. People aren’t moving to a given community simply to be closer to work if there’s no central office or even a requirement to go into one,” Durham said. “So, it’s imperative that officials looking to boost their communities’ economic development opportunities shift their thinking.”
Part of that shift means focusing on strategies that create an attractive quality of life both for residents and business, plan for economic recovery and resilience, smart incentive packages, and other tools. Communities must also find creative ways to address the shortage of workforce and entry-level housing options.
BEDC course speakers will address several topics over the four days that will help attendees capitalize on their communities’ unique assets and how they can effectively use and maximize placemaking as an economic development tool.
Among the course topics:
Workforce Housing Strategies
Business Retention and Expansion
Real Estate Development and Reuse
Business Credit Analysis
Workforce Development
Strategic Planning
Economic Impact and Incentives
Managing Economic Development Organizations
Ethics in Economic Development
Small Business and Entrepreneur Development
Marketing and Attraction
Disaster Recovery and Resilience
Media Strategy
This four-day conference gives attendees opportunities to network with industry peers and experts, deeply explore the fundamentals and emerging concepts of comprehensive economic development and prepare them to immediately implement tools and skills gained during the course.
Since its inception in 1967, the Georgia Tech BEDC has prepared more than 3,300 economic developers from all over the world for the  IEDC Certified Economic Developer
(CEcD) Examination. The certification is considered an essential component of a career in economic development. BEDC at Georgia Tech is
accredited by the IEDC and qualifies as a professional development training requirement needed to sit for the exam.
Additional Images
Related links
Georgia Tech Basic Economic Development Course
Contact
Péralte C. Paul
404.316.1210
peralte@gatech.edu
Email
peralte@gatech.edu
Additional information
About the Enterprise Innovation Institute
The Enterprise Innovation Institute, the Georgia Institute of Technology’s economic development unit, serves all of Georgia through a variety of services and programs that build and scale startups, grow business enterprises and energize ecosystem builders. As the nation’s largest and most comprehensive university-based economic development organization, the Institute’s expertise and reach are global; its innovation, entrepreneurship, and ecosystem development programs serve governments, universities, nonprofits, and other organizations worldwide. In 2022, Enterprise Innovation Institute programs worked with 15,785 clients to create or save 13,891 jobs and secure $2.4 billion in capital investments. As a group, the Enterprise Innovation Institute helped generate an economic impact return of $422.55 for every dollar received from state appropriations in 2022. Learn more at
innovate.gatech.edu .
About the Center for Economic Development Research (CEDR)
The Center for Economic Development Research (CEDR) is a unit of the Enterprise Innovation Institute at Georgia Tech with a mission to help communities and economic developers grow and thrive. CEDR, which manages the Basic Economic Development Course, uses in-depth of research, planning, and implementation experience along with resources across the broader Georgia Tech community to provide cutting edge solutions for the innovation economy. To learn more about CEDR and the services offered, please visit
cedr.gatech.edu .
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000