Data Days to Take Place October 11-14
Georgia Tech's Inaugural Data Days takes place Oct. 11-14
Oct 03, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
The Data Excellence committee will host its inaugural Georgia Tech Data Days from Tuesday, Oct. 11, to Friday, Oct. 14. The week includes three themed days filled with interactive sessions and trainings followed by a Friday symposium at the Global Learning Center.
Data Days kicks off with a virtual fireside chat with Vice President for Information Technology and Chief Information Officer Daren Hubbard, who is the executive sponsor for Data Excellence. The week follows with various virtual, in-person, and hybrid sessions covering topics from data analytics and dashboards to data governance and data protection.
The Friday symposium features Talitha Washington, director of the Atlanta University Center Consortium’s Data Science Initiative, and Phyllis Schneck, chief information security officer at Northrop Grumman, as keynote speakers. Washington is responsible for leading efforts to secure a historic $10 million National Science Foundation Grant at Clark Atlanta University, which is being used to expand data science at historically black colleges and universities. A graduate of Georgia Tech, Schneck oversees global cybersecurity strategy and policies for Northrop Grumman and is responsible for the digital security of the company’s products, services, and infrastructures.
“We are excited to welcome Dr. Washington and Dr. Schneck as esteemed keynotes during our inaugural data week at Tech,” said Hubbard.
Open to the Georgia Tech community, the Friday symposium also includes a morning poster session and vendor showcase from 8 to 10 a.m. Students, faculty, and staff are invited to submit posters that highlight the use of data analytics or center around data security as part of the poster session.
The Data Days symposium is free and includes breakfast and lunch.
To view a full schedule of events, register for the symposium, or sign up to present a poster,  visit
https://datax.gatech.edu
Additional Images
Contact
Malynda Dorsey Smith
Senior Director, IT Change Management & Communications malynda@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000