Data Days Conference Touts Data Empowerment
The second annual Data Days conference at Georgia Tech was hosted Oct. 23-25, 2023.
Oct 30, 2023
The Data Days conference returned for a second year to Georgia Tech, October 23-25.
Hosted under the theme ‘Empowering You,’ the 2023 conference guided attendees through three days of in-person (and online) sessions, demonstrations, and enriching keynotes that showcased the power of data and data tools available at the Institute – and beyond.
Data Days – Empowering You kicked off its first day with a rousing keynote address by Dr. Amelia Parnell, vice president for Research and Policy at NASPA – Student Affairs Administrators in Higher Education. She was proceeded with welcome messages from Dr. Shantay Bolton, executive vice president of Administration and Finance and chief business officer, and Daren Hubbard, vice president for Information Technology and chief information officer, and Data Days executive sponsor.
“The theme for this year’s conference is ‘Empowering You,’” Hubbard said. “This theme is centered around equipping data users with the tools and resources to manage and leverage data effectively. Throughout the week, I encourage you to engage in conversations and make meaningful connections that help strengthen our culture of continuous learning and data-driven decision making here at Georgia Tech.”
The Office of Information Technology’s (OIT) Katie Crawford – executive director of Enterprise Applications and Data Management – and Zachary Hayes – director of Data Governance – served as 2023 co-chairs.
Data Days featured more than two dozen concurrent sessions presented by more than 40 Georgia Tech faculty, staff, and students and representatives from the University System of Georgia (USG) and fellow USG institutions. Vendors hosted demonstrations and live workshops. A poster session featured a dozen data-themed presentations from students, faculty, and staff. A student-led presentation and discussion took the spotlight one conference evening.
In total, some 300 unique participants attended the conference in-person, hosted in the Bill Moore Student Success Center. Sessions were also streamed to online attendees.
2023 Data Days corporate sponsors included: Accenture, Deloitte, Elastic, OneTrust, Tableau, Splunk, and Workday.
Data Days – Empowering You session recordings can be viewed via the OIT YouTube channel at
b.gatech.edu/DataDaysRecordings2023 .
Learn more about Data Days at Georgia Tech by visiting  c.gatech.edu/datadays .
Additional Images
Related links
Data Days at Georgia Tech
Email
courtney.hill@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000