Deadline to Apply for GTFWC Scholarships is March 8
The Georgia Tech Faculty Women's Club (GTFWC) will award up to six $2000 scholarships to current undergraduates who are children of permanent Tech employees.
Feb 24, 2024
The GTFWC Scholarship Program
is pleased to award scholarships to deserving GT undergraduates who have a parent or guardian employed by Georgia Tech – the children of our Georgia Tech “family”.  For the 2024 academic year, up to 6 scholarships of $2000 each will be awarded, to be divided between Fall and Spring semester. In August of 2024, the Foundation will transfer the scholarship funds to the GT Financial Aid Office for disbursement ($1,000 per semester) to recipients for ANY expenses including, but not limited to, tuition, fees, books, and/or room and board.
The deadline to apply is March 8, 2024.
Guidelines for Selection of Recipients:
Applicants must be a
current GT undergraduate student
and have completed at least one full semester at GT;
The applicant’s parent or guardian must be a permanent employee of Georgia Tech or an organization recognized as an
affiliated organization
by the GT Office of Legal Affairs and Risk Management;
The applicant must fully complete the application.   There is no minimum GPA to apply. The applicant must submit a headshot and two letters of recommendation (which may be from GT Faculty or Staff) to the Scholarship Chair, Dr. Brenda "B" Woods,
drbwoods@.gatech.edu . By providing their GTID in the application, the applicant acknowledges that Scholarship Chair will access their official electronic transcript, and grants permission for their name and photo to be used in GT and GTFWC communications/website and publications.
Questions?
Details are on the
GTFWC Scholarship webpage ,
or you may contact the GTFWC Scholarship Chair, Dr. Brenda "B" Woods, Director of Research and Assessment for Student Engagement and Well-Being,
drbwoods@gatech.edu
Apply Online :
https://baseline.campuslabs.com/gatech/gtfwcsa2425
Related links
GTFWC Website
GTFWC Scholarship Webpage
Contact
Dr. Brenda "B" Woods
Chair, GTFWC Scholarship Committee
drbwoods@gatech.edu
Email
drbwoods@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000