Dean Search Begins for College of Computing
The search will be chaired by Raheem Beyah, dean and Southern Company Chair in the College of Engineering.
Aug 29, 2023
Provost Steven W. McLaughlin has convened a search committee tasked with selecting the new dean for Georgia Tech’s College of Computing. Search committee members were chosen via a nomination process and include a mix of faculty, staff, and students from within the College of Computing, as well as
from
Colleges and units from across campus that work closely with Computing.
The search will be chaired by Raheem Beyah, dean and Southern Company Chair in the College of Engineering. Georgia Tech has retained the services of the executive search firm Heidrick & Struggles.
“The important process for finding the new dean for the College of Computing is in great hands with Dean Beyah and the search committee, and I thank them for their dedication to the search,” said McLaughlin. “The College of Computing at Georgia Tech is a growing and dynamic community, and I hope members of the faculty, staff, and students will fully engage in the search.”
College Engagement:
Consultants from the search firm will lead town hall events for faculty, staff, and students. These events will engage the College of Computing community and seek the community ’ s feedback on the preferred qualifications of the next dean. The search firm will also share details about the search process.
Town hall events will offer in-person and virtual participation where possible.
Tuesday, Sept. 12, 9:00
– 9:55 a.m. - Staff Town Hall
(hybrid format; in-person at Klaus 1116E/W, virtual via Zoom)
Tuesday, Sept. 12, 10:30
– 11:25 a.m. - Student Town Hall
(hybrid format; in-person at Klaus 1116E/W, virtual via Zoom)
Tuesday, Sept. 12, 11:30 a.m.
– 12:25 p.m. - Faculty Town Hall
(hybrid format; in-person at Klaus 1116E/W, virtual via Zoom)
Thursday, Sept. 14, 11:00
– 11:55 a.m. - Virtual Faculty, Staff, and Student Town Hall
(virtual via Zoom)
College of Computing community members who are not able to attend town hall events are encouraged to share their feedback with the search firm by emailing
GTcomputingdean@heidrick.com .
More on the search:
The search is open to both external and internal candidates at Georgia Tech. This position reports to Provost McLaughlin.
Details and updates on the search, including town hall links, search committee roster, position description, and link to apply, will be posted to  provost.gatech.edu/college-computing-dean-search .
Inquiries and nominations are invited and should be sent to the Heidrick & Struggles team at  GTcomputingdean@heidrick.com .
While applications and nominations will be received until the dean is selected, interested parties are encouraged to submit their application materials by
Nov. 24, 2023 .
Alex Orso, professor and associate dean, will serve as interim dean until the new dean is named.
Additional Images
Related links
Alex Orso Named Interim Dean of College of Computing
College of Computing
Contact
Office of the Provost
Email
provostsoffice@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000