Delta Air Lines Touches Down in Tech Square with $5 Million Investment
Delta Air Lines plans to open an innovation center on Georgia Tech's campus, using Yellow Jacket ideas and innovation to help solve the company's problems and create a better customer experience.
Delta is creating a collaborative research center at Georgia Tech, using minds on our campus to enhance company operations and the customer experience.
Nov 13, 2015
— Atlanta, GA
One of the world’s leading airline companies is developing a collaborative research center in the heart of Tech Square. Delta Air Lines will
invest $2 million to build the facilit y, in which it plans to enhance operations and improve customer experience by tapping into the knowledge at Georgia Tech. “Delta Air Lines and Georgia Tech have a rich heritage of working together in everything from research to hiring our co-ops and graduates. We are delighted that Delta’s collaborative research center will provide even greater opportunities for Georgia Tech students, faculty, and staff to work with this outstanding global airline,” said Georgia Tech President G.P. “Bud” Peterson. Delta has pioneered many firsts in the airline industry including the use of a hub and spoke system in 1955, being the first U.S. airline with motion graphic maps in the cabin showing the aircraft’s position and route in 1992, and launching the first mobile baggage tracking app in 2011. The innovation center at Georgia Tech will also be a first for any college in the United States. “This facility is the first of its kind for the domestic aviation industry. Tapping into the bright minds at Georgia Tech is an opportunity to gain new perspectives and approaches across Delta for changes that will advance our business now and for years to come,” said Gil West, executive vice president and chief operating officer for Delta. “At Delta we are continuously seeking to improve and elevate our operations and the customer experience.” Inside the space, Georgia Tech students will have the opportunity to improve Delta’s day-to-day business operations as well as customer experience. The new research center will be completed by 2016 in the Centergy Building. The building is already home to other industry innovation centers for The Home Depot, Coca-Cola Enterprises, Panasonic, and AT&T. Delta also plans to invest $3 million to the Georgia Tech Foundation to fund the Georgia Tech Advanced Manufacturing Pilot Facility (AMPF). The AMPF establishes Georgia Tech as a national leader in advanced manufacturing with a collaboration among the Schools of Mechanical Engineering, Aerospace Engineering, Industrial and Systems Engineering, Materials Science and Engineering, and Interactive Computing. “We are grateful to The Delta Air Lines Foundation for their generous commitment that will facilitate breakthrough research in advanced manufacturing,” President Peterson said.
Additional Images
Contact
Lisa Grovenstein Institute Communications 404.894.8835
Email
lisa.grovenstein@comm.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000