Distractions and Diversions for Election Week
With many already stressed about the outcome, it’s important to find ways to distract yourself and destress, not only leading up to Tuesday, but in the days that follow as well.
red and blue hands raised
Nov 02, 2020
— Atlanta, GA
Election Day is Tuesday, Nov. 3, though experts are increasingly warning that we won’t know the results of some of the races — including the race for president — until several days afterwards.
With many already stressed about the outcome, it’s important to find ways to distract yourself and de-stress, not only leading up to Tuesday, but in the days that follow as well.
Q Chats: LGBTQIA Discussion Groups
Various days
Every week, the LGBTQIA Resource Center hosts Q Chats, where groups of LGBTQIA+ students can speak virtually with others in their community. Different intersections of groups include men’s and women’s groups; queer people of color; and trans, gender non-conforming, and gender-questioning groups. Click the link above to learn about when each group is meeting and register for a Q Chat.
7th National Collegiate Paper Art Triennial
Through Nov. 13
Robert C. Williams Museum of Papermaking
The Paper Art Triennial is celebrating its 20th anniversary with a collection of 37 works in the field of papermaking, as created by students from 15 universities around the world. The museum is open all day Monday through Friday, but visitors must first make a reservation at
paper.gatech.edu .
Free Virtual Fitness
Nov. 2 – 7
Online
The Campus Recreaton Center is offering free virtual classes through Nov. 7. Use promo code GTStudentFall2020 to sign up.
Ramblin’ Wreck the Vote Tie-Dye
Nov. 2, 4
Smithgall Student Services (Flag) Building
The Office of Student Diversity Programs will be passing out tie-dye materials for you to make your own election-themed t-shirt. Material pickup will be both the day before and after Election Day so you can de-stress and celebrate voting in style. Only the first 120 people who register will get the shirt and materials, so do so beforehand
here .
GoSTEM Career Path Series With President Cabrera
Tuesday, Nov. 3, 4 – 5 p.m.
Online
President Ángel Cabrera will speak as part of a series about career paths for Hispanics and Latinos in STEM.
OMED Post-Election Kickback
Wednesday, Nov. 4, 10 a.m. – 3:30 p.m.
Chapin Building
The Office of Minority Education and Development (OMED) will be hosting a post-election kickback the day after Election Day. Students are welcome to stop by and grab free food, listen to music, or even hop on the open mic or dialogue with others.
Indoor Cycling
Wednesday, Nov. 4, 4:30 – 5:15 p.m.
Campus Recreation Center
Hop on an indoor bike and cycle at your own pace. You can work your way through climbs, sprints, and flat roads. Space is limited, so click the link above to register.
Conversations With Cabrera Featuring Enric Sala
Wednesday, Nov. 4, 6 –7 p.m.
Online
Join President Ángel Cabrera in conversation with conservationist Enric Sala, current National Geographic Explorer-in-Residence and author of The Nature of Nature: Why We Need the Wild, which makes a clear case for why protecting nature is our best health insurance, and why it makes economic sense.
SCPC Presents: Claymation!
Wednesday, Nov. 4, 6 – 8:45 p.m.
Exhibition Hall, Midtown II, or Online
If you’ve ever wanted to learn how to make your own claymation figure, now’s your chance. SCPC will provide all of the materials and instructions; participants can follow along in person or virtually. Reserve your ticket to the event
here .
Tactile Thursdays: Petal Fold Book
Thursday, Nov. 5, 4 – 5p.m.
Online
The Library hosts this workshops where you will “unfold” the technique to making a blooming book that uses paper folding. You will make your own unique book with colorful, patterned paper.
Fall Flicks: 'Parasite'
Friday, Nov 6, 7 p.m.
Bobby Dodd Stadium
Enjoy the last showing in the fall flicks series on the lawn of Grant Field.
Saturday Morning Cartoons
Saturday, Nov. 7, Doors at 11:30 a.m., cartoons begin at noon
Ferst Center for the Arts
Enjoy classic Looney Tunes cartoons with Bugs Bunny, Elmer Fudd, Porky Pig, Sylvester, Tweety Bird, and more. Take a break from studying, stroll over in your sweats, and settle in to a comfy seat at the Ferst Center.
View other upcoming arts events .
Additional Images
Contact
Grace Wyner
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000