Diversity and Inclusion Fellows Program Seeks Fifth Cohort
The Diversity and Inclusion Fellows Program at Georgia Tech is now accepting applications for its fifth cohort.
ADVANCE Professors Terry Blum and Martha Grover
Apr 19, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
The  Diversity and Inclusion Fellows Program  at Georgia Tech is now accepting applications for its fifth cohort.
Launched in 2017 with support from  Institute Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion  and the ADVANCE Program, the Diversity and Inclusion Fellows Program brings together campus community members who individually and collectively advance their action, research, or teaching objectives while improving inclusivity on campus.
"Culture change requires not only leadership, but also the engagement of individuals in the community who see a particular need and are passionate about being part of the solution," said Martha Grover, ADVANCE Professor for the College of Engineering and program co-director.
Terry Blum, ADVANCE Professor for Scheller College of Business and program co-director added, "Being a Diversity and Inclusion fellow is a great opportunity to work within a community of others who are working toward increasing diversity, equity, and inclusion at Georgia Tech. Fellows help shine a light on diversity gaps and commit to working toward closing them through their projects."
Projects from the 2020 cohort
included expansion of ABLE Alliance, a campus group that "promotes the diversity and inclusion of the disabled population at Georgia Tech,” and the expansion of the
Black Media Studies
program housed in Ivan Allen College’s School of Literature, Media, and Communication.
The 2021 program will run from September through April 2022. During this time, fellows are expected to complete an individual or group action, teaching, or research objective to share with the campus community.
Interested applicants should submit an issue area or project idea to focus on as a potential Diversity and Inclusion fellow. The program is seeking participants who have been immersed in the topics of diversity and inclusion, as well as those interested in connecting these topics to different fields and perspectives.
All Georgia Tech faculty, post-doctoral fellows, staff, and graduate and undergraduate students are welcome to apply.
To apply, visit  https://gatech.co1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_eWYsWdFZCaOhEW2 . The application deadline is Friday, May 21, 2021.
To learn more about the Diversity and Inclusion Fellows Program, visit  diversity.gatech.edu/DIFellowsProgram .
Additional Images
Contact
Courtney Hill
Communications Director
Institute Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
courtney.hill@gatech.edu
Email
courtney.hill@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000