Don’t Forget to Register Your Youth Programs
Regardless of whether the program is in-person or virtual, the Youth Programs Policy still applies.
Youth Programs
Aug 30, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
It’s back-to-school season for the Georgia Tech community and the greater Atlanta area, and minors are excited to participate in the many youth programs and extracurricular activities that Georgia Tech has to offer.
Last year, many programs successfully pivoted to a virtual setting due to the pandemic and turned out to be a great success. This year, some programs plan to return to an in-person setting, while others plan to continue the success that was found in a virtual setting.
Regardless of whether the program is in-person or virtual, the
Youth Programs Policy
still applies. Below are the requirements for hosting a youth program.
For more information and resources on youth programs, visit
youthprograms.gatech.edu . If you have questions,
contact Sally Robertson .
All Youth Programs Require:
Registration Form
The registration form must be submitted no less than 30 days prior to the start of the program.
The registration form can be found on the youth programs website.
Background Checks
Background checks are run through HR.
They are required for all those in direct contact with minors.
Even in an online setting, a videoconference or an email are still considered direct contact.
Training
Training is administered through Canvas for employees and through the Training Request form for students and non-employees.
Training is required for all those in direct contact with minors.
Staff and Volunteer Code of Conduct
All staff and volunteers, whether in direct contact or not, are required to sign the Staff and Volunteer Code of Conduct.
There is a separate code of conduct specifically for virtual programs.
Mandatory Reporter
The mandatory reporter requirements apply for virtual and in-person programs. If you see something, say something.
Supervision Ratios
Virtual programs use the Rule of Three, meaning there are always at least three people present with the minor(s): one child and two adults.
In-person programs must use the American Camp Association Supervision Ratios.
Parental Release Form
For all programs, every participant must have a parent or guardian sign and complete the parental release form.
Additional Images
Contact
Sally Robertson
Office of the General Counsel
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000