Don't Have Plans for July 4th? Here are a Few Suggestions
This weekend, to celebrate the Fourth of July holiday, numerous events will take place throughout metro Atlanta.
Fireworks at Centennial Olympic Park as seen from Bobby Dodd Stadium on July 4, 2012. Photo courtesy of Danny Karnik.
Jul 01, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
This weekend, to celebrate the Fourth of July holiday, numerous events will take place throughout metro Atlanta.
Georgia Tech’s campus will be closed on Monday, July 5, in observance of the holiday. For those who are on or near campus this weekend, here are some events that will offer free or low-cost admission:
Red, White, and BOOM!
Saturday, July 3
5 – 11 p.m.
This event will be held in downtown Norcross with food vendors from local merchants and activities for kids, including face painting and bounce houses. The event also includes fireworks. Admission is free. More information is available
here .
Stars and Stripes Fireworks Celebration
Sunday, July 4
6 – 10:30 p.m.
The celebration will take place in Sandy Springs and will include food trucks, live music, and fireworks. Admission is free. More information is available
here .
Fantastic Fourth Celebration
July 1 – 5
Stone Mountain Park is holding a five-day event featuring a laser show followed by a fireworks display each night. This year, attendees must reserve a square (which holds up to four people) on the lawn for $20. More information is available
here .
Independence Day With the Braves
July 2 – 4
The Braves will host the Marlins this weekend. After the game on Friday, July 2, there will be fireworks for the crowd. On July 4, the first 3,000 children ages 14 and under will receive a mini Ronald Acuña Jr. bobblehead. More information is available
here .
Movies Under the Stars
Saturday, July 3
6 p.m.
Movies Under the Stars is hosting a special celebration before the movie screening of
Onward . The event will take place at Honeysuckle Park in Doraville. People are encouraged to bring blankets and snacks. For more information, visit
here .
Creekwater Alpaca Farm
July 3 – 4
Due to Covid-19, tours of the farm in Snellville have been limited, but tickets are available for the holiday weekend. Along with alpacas, the farm has goats, sheep, rabbits, and other animals. For more information, visit
here .
Additional Images
Contact
Vanesa Vargas
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000