Drones, Driverless Cars and Difficult Decisions
Georgia Tech hosts a panel discussion in Washington, D.C. about the emerging debate on ethics and robotics.
A robot from Georgia Tech's Robotarium on display at the Ethics in Robotics roundtable on Sept. 25, 2018
Sep 25, 2018
— Washington, D.C.
Robots are here. They’ve entered our daily lives and can be found in our homes, hospitals and our streets.
These robot and human interactions raise a series of questions that the general public and lawmakers must face.
“When robots start truly engaging with us, what does that really mean?” asked Magnus Egerstedt, the Steve W. Chaddick School Chair and a professor in the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering. “And what does it mean for us to interact with them?”
The emerging debate on ethics and robotics was the focus of two panel discussion Georgia Tech hosted Tuesday in Washington, D.C. The event – “Drones, Driverless Cars and Difficult Decisions” examined the expectations humans have about robots’ capabilities and limits. They also spoke of the responsibilities that researchers, scientists, corporations and policymakers have as well.
A luncheon roundtable, held on Capitol Hill, attracted congressional staffers, representatives from national associations and others from the D.C. policy community.
During the evening roundtable held at the National Press Club, reporters from  Inside Higher Ed ,  The Washington Post and  U.S. News & World Report  asked questions and helped guide the conversation.
In addition to Egerstedt two other Georgia Tech professors served on the panel: Ronald Arkin, director of the Mobile Robot Laboratory in the College of Computing, and Ayanna Howard, chair of the School of Interactive Computing in the College of Computing and the the Linda J. and Mark C. Smith Chair professor.
The other four panelists were: Cindy Grimm, an associate professor of mechanical engineering at Oregon State University; Benjamin Kuipers, a professor of computer science and engineering at the University of Michigan; Bertram Malle, a professor in the department of cognitive, linguistic and psychological sciences at Brown University; and Reid Simmons, a research professor in robotics and computer science at Carnegie Mellon University.
Arkin said for years researchers focused on making new discoveries without paying as much attention to the implications. But there is acknowledgement of the responsibilities that roboticists have to make sure they don’t promise more than they can deliver.
He noted the complexities in programming a robot on how to be good.
“We don’t have the answers for all this yet,” he said. “We are just beginning to make forays into this space … Please be patient.”
Additional Images
Contact
For media inquiries: Laura Diamond,  laura.diamond@gatech.edu
Email
laura.diamond@gatech.edu
Additional information
National Roundtable Initiative
Georgia Tech’s national media roundtable initiative brings together thought leaders from different organizations to discuss important issues. It is the result of a partnership with the Georgia Tech’s Office of Development, Institute Communications, Office of Government and Community Relations and individual colleges and units.
This was Georgia Tech’s ninth roundtable and past events have examined the changing landscape in higher education, college admissions trends, lessons learned since Hurricane Katrina and how to attract more female engineers and more African-American men into science, technology, engineering and mathematics.
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000