Durham Named CEO of Georgia Center for Oncology Research and Education
Lynn Durham, vice president for Institute Relations, has been named president and CEO of Georgia Center for Oncology Research and Education.
Lynn Durham
Dec 04, 2020
— Atlanta, GA
Lynn Durham, vice president for Institute Relations, has been named president and CEO of Georgia Center for Oncology Research and Education (Georgia CORE). She will depart Georgia Tech following 25 years of service.
After joining Tech in 1995 to lead the legislative advocacy program, Durham went on to serve under three Tech presidents. In 2006, she joined the Office of the President under then-President G. Wayne Clough. In 2010, Durham was named chief of staff to then-President G.P. “Bud” Peterson and a member of the President’s Cabinet. In 2018, Durham was appointed as a member of the Executive Leadership Team. In 2019, she was named vice president for Institute Relations by President Ángel Cabrera.
“We celebrate Lynn and wish her all the best in her new role at Georgia CORE,” said President Cabrera. “Her tremendous contributions to Tech over the past 25 years leave an undeniable mark on the institution and, for that, we are incredibly grateful.”
During her tenure, Durham proudly taught GT 1000 for seven years and was instrumental in the campus effort to bring then-President Barack Obama to campus in 2015. She also played pivotal leadership roles in campuswide well-being initiatives, serving as co-chair of the Mental Health Task Force in 2013 and the Sexual Violence Prevention Task Force in 2014. Additionally, she provided direction and day-to-day oversight of the Path Forward Together effort, working with groups of faculty, staff, and students to identify and make improvements for the campus community. While at Tech, she completed the Doctor of Education (Ed.D.) in Higher Education Management from the University of Georgia.
Georgia CORE is a statewide nonprofit organization that works with local hospitals, community organizations, public health centers, and the National Cancer Institute to leverage public and private funding to provide cancer research and expanded access to early cancer screening for underserved communities across the state. Durham has worked with Georgia CORE since 2014, serving as a member — and then co-chair — of the Survivorship Advisory Board. She has also served as a member of their board of directors since 2017.
President Cabrera has named a search committee, to be chaired by Dene Sheheane, president of the Georgia Tech Alumni Association. Frank Neville, senior vice president for Strategic Initiatives and chief of staff, will lead Institute Relations on an interim basis until the role is filled.
Additional Images
Contact
Susie Ivy
Institute Communications
Email
susie.ivy@comm.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000