Earth Month Features Sustainability Events
April is Earth Month with a full calendar of events
open to the campus community.
Apr 04, 2024
April is
Earth Month
at Georgia Tech. Coordinated by the Office of Sustainability and hosted by partners across campus, it extends the Institute’s observance of Earth Day (April 22) by showcasing campus sustainability efforts and providing opportunities for students, faculty, and staff to learn and take action.
This year’s Earth Month holds special significance, as Georgia Tech will soon publish its first Climate Action Plan, a road map for reaching net-zero greenhouse gas emissions.
“Earth Month presents us with a unique time to honor and safeguard our environment together,” said Vanessa Suarez, sustainability coordinator in the Office of Sustainability. “It's an opportunity for all of us to be inspired and make a positive difference, both locally and globally; a reminder that collective changes yield significant impact.”
Events will be hosted by organizations and departments across campus during the month to learn, celebrate, and share best practices.
Featured Event: Earth Day Sustainable Org Fair and Celebration
Wednesday, April 17, 11 a.m. – 1 p.m., The Kendeda Building for Innovative Sustainable Design
This signature event will feature sustainability-focused departments and student organizations, Earth Month BYO T-shirt screen printing and other textiles, and free King of Pops popsicles. Sign up
here
to table.
Earth Month Bird Walk – Lullwater (Emory)
Friday, April 5, 10:25 a.m. – 12:35 p.m., Lullwater Preserve, 1463 Clifton Road
Hosted by Georgia Tech Birdwatchers with support from the Office of Sustainability, attendees can observe and learn about birds with club experts at the scenic Lullwater Preserve near Emory’s campus. Binoculars provided.
For registration and additional information, click
here .
Tech Beautification Day
Saturday, April 6, 8:30 a.m. – 12:30 p.m. Tech Green
Come get your hands dirty to make our campus green and beautiful at the 25th annual Tech Beautification Day, a volunteering event hosted by the Student Government Association and
Infrastructure and Sustainability . The event is capped at 300 volunteers, so sign up today!
For registration and additional information, click
here .
Global Media Festival Film Screening: ‘Bigger Than Us’ Documentary + Live Q&A
Sunday, April 7, 2:30 – 5 p.m., John Lewis Student Center, Cypress Theater
Bigger Than Us
follows Melati Wijsen, an 18-year-old Indonesian activist fighting plastic pollution in her country as she expands her impact by collaborating with activists across the globe. The screening will be followed by a live virtual discussion with the film’s director, Flore Vasseur.
This event is part of the
Global Media Festival,
taking place March 29 – April 7 and exploring themes around the UN Sustainable Development Goals. The festival is co-sponsored by the School of Modern Languages; the Atlanta Global Studies Center; the School of Literature, Media, and Communication; and the Brook Byers Institute for Sustainable Systems.
For registration and additional information, click
here .
EcoCommons Tour
Wednesday, April 10, Noon – 1 p.m., The Kendeda Building for Innovative Sustainable Design
The 80-acre EcoCommons is one of Georgia Tech’s most impressive sustainability features. Institute Landscape Architect Jason Gregory will lead attendees on a tour to learn about the native performance landscape adjacent to The Kendeda Building.
Carbon Reduction Challenge Info Session – Virtual
Thursday, April 11, 11 – 11:50 a.m., Online
The Carbon Reduction Challenge is a competition focused on empowering students to become part of the climate change solution. Join the Ray C. Anderson Center for Sustainable Business for a virtual information session to learn more about participating in the challenge this summer.
For registration and more information, click
here .
Climate FRESK Workshops
Thursday, April 11, Noon – 3:30 p.m., Kendeda Seminar Room 118
Monday, April 15, 11 a.m. – 2:30 p.m., Kendeda Seminar Room 118
Thursday, April 19, 10 a.m. – 1:30 p.m., O’Keefe Building, third floor, Sunroom conference room*
Climate FRESK is an internationally recognized workshop based on scientific reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change that teaches the fundamental causes and effects of climate change through a collaborative and engaging game. The Office of Sustainability will host three FRESK Workshops throughout April.
*The workshop on April 19 is co-sponsored by the Georgia Tech French Club and will be held partially in French.
For more information and registration, click
here .
BBISS Seminar Series: Neha Kumar
Thursday, April 11, 3 – 4 p.m., Hybrid Event – Online and BBISS Offices, 760 Spring Street, Suite 160
Neha Kumar is an associate professor in the School of International Affairs and the School of Interactive Computing at Georgia Tech. She will present a new paper that describes opportunities for human–computer interaction to reimagine the design of sociotechnical systems toward advancing sustainable, just, and humane futures.
For more information and the event link, click
here .
Atlanta Global Studies Symposium: Languages of Sustainability and the Global South
Friday, April 12, 8:30 a.m. – 7 p.m., Main Auditorium, Technology Square Research Building
Hosted by the Atlanta Global Studies Center and with support from the Emory University Office of Global Strategy and Initiatives, the symposium will present initiatives that promote global education, language learning, sustainable development, and community engagement. Partners, faculty, students, community organizers, K-12 teachers, and the public are welcome.
For more information and registration, click
here .
Frontiers in Science: Climate Action
Thursday, April 18, 9 a.m. – 5:30 p.m., The Dalney Building
The College of Sciences will convene 100 campus and community stakeholders to discuss groundbreaking research on climate change, challenges, and solutions. More than 25
speakers and panelists
from across Georgia Tech and Atlanta will share their work and ideas to address major climate and community challenges. Frontiers will also feature leadership keynotes, a
student video showcase
with scholarships, networking lunch and reception, and a Strategic Energy Institute interdisciplinary
seed grant challenge
for assistant professors.
Attendance is by invitation, and registration is limited.
To suggest participants, please contact: events@cos.gatech.edu.
Carbon Reduction Challenge Spring Showcase
Friday, April 19, 2 – 4 p.m., The Kendeda Building for Innovative Sustainable Design
Eight teams composed of students enrolled in Earth and Atmospheric Sciences 3111, “Energy, Environment, and Society,” will present their final semester-long Carbon Reduction Challenge projects. The projects show more than 9 million pounds of carbon dioxide reductions annually while generating yearly savings of over $500 million in energy bills and carbon sequestration. Attendees can enjoy snacks and drinks and vote for their favorite project.
For more information and registration, click
here .
Sustain-X Hangout
Tuesday, April 23, 3 p.m. – 4 p.m., Hybrid/Scheller College of Business, Room 4426
A partnership between the
Ray C. Anderson Center for Sustainable Business
and
CREATE-X , Sustain-X is a Sustainability Next and Georgia Tech strategic plan project. With events occurring on the fourth Tuesday of every month, this session will examine social and environmental entrepreneurship and how to access resources for projects.
For more information and to register, click
here .
Interdisciplinary and Critical Approaches to Sustainability
Wednesday, April 24, 2024, 8:30 a.m. – 6 p.m.
The Atlanta Global Studies Center will present a conference entitled “Sustainability in a Planet of Diverse Knowledges and Persistent Inequalities.” The event features Georgia Tech faculty panels   and keynotes from Nelson Maldonado-Torres and Jessica Hernandez on “Colonial and Decolonial Sustainabilities” and “Indigenous Science: From Local to Global Context,” respectively.
For more information and registration, click
here .
BBISS Seminar Series – Fani Boukouvala
Thursday, April 25, 3 – 4 p.m., Hybrid/BBISS Offices, 760 Spring Street, Suite 160
Fani Boukouvala, assistant professor in the School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, will present a talk about a new approach for chemical conversion of waste plastics to their original raw materials, including a detailed process modeling of a chemical reactor validated by experimental data, and proceed with simulation of an entire pilot scale facility.
For the event link, click
here .
Additional events, volunteer opportunities, and campaigns are posted on the
Earth Month calendar .  Submit your event to be featured via the Earth Month
form .
Contact
Abby Bower
Sustainability Program Support Coordinator
Office of Sustainability | sustain.gatech.edu
Infrastructure and Sustainability
Email
Abby.bower@sustain.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000