Education Abroad Director Lorie Johns Páulez Elected to Global E3 Executive Committee
Lorie Johns Páulez elected a member of the Global Engineering Education Exchange Executive Committee.
Lorie Johns Páulez
Jul 05, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
Lorie Johns Páulez, director of Education Abroad in the Georgia Institute of Technology’s Office of International Education, has been elected a member of the
Global Engineering Education Exchange (Global E3)
Executive Committee.
A competitive, consortium-based international exchange program for undergraduate engineering students, Global E3 allows students at member universities to study at any member university outside their home country. With more than 70 member institutions in 20 countries, the program exchanges about 300 students each year and also offers intensive language instruction and paid internship opportunities .
Johns Páulez will serve a three-year term on the committee, a group of faculty and staff elected by consortium members that leads the consortium.
“I am proud to represent Georgia Tech on this international stage,” said Johns Páulez. “We’re proud to have been a founding member of Global E3, and we’ve seen firsthand the transformative power this exchange program has for both our own undergraduates and those we’ve hosted from abroad. I look forward to supporting the consortium’s future and growth.”
Recognizing a growing demand for internationally experienced engineering graduates, leading universities around the world, including Georgia Tech, worked together to establish Global E3 in 1995. Since the program’s inception, Georgia Tech has either sponsored or hosted more than 100 students.
Global E3 is an integral part of Georgia Tech’s commitment to expanding its global connectivity, which is included among the six focus areas in the Institute’s strategic plan. Before the pandemic, more than 56% of Tech undergraduates participated in an international experience before graduation, and the Institute aspires to be a national leader in study abroad participation.
To that end, the
Education Abroad team in the Office of International Education
is collaborating with faculty to offer students greater access to international programs and experiences.
“Georgia Tech is proud to be part of Global E3, and we are thrilled that Lorie will be representing us on the consortium’s executive committee,” said Bernard Kippelen, vice provost for International Initiatives. “Georgia Tech is committed to developing students into globally minded and interculturally competent leaders, and we are grateful to Global E3 and other trusted international partners for offering our students such transformative experiences.”
Additional Images
Contact
The Office of International Education
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000