Engineering Georgia Names Four Tech Women Most Influential
Tech faculty claimed four spots in Engineering Georgia’s second annual listing of Top 100 Influential Women in Georgia.
Engineering Georgia named four Tech faculty to Top 100 Influential Women: (L-R) Ellen Dunham-Jones, Lauren Stewart, Christine Valle, and Kari Edison Watkins.
Mar 21, 2019
— Atlanta, GA
Georgia Tech faculty claimed four spots in
Engineering Georgia’s
second annual listing of Top 100 Influential Women in Georgia. They are Ellen Dunham-Jones, Lauren Stewart, Christine Valle, and Kari Edison Watkins.
The women were recommended and reviewed by their peers, industry leaders, and members of the
Engineering Georgia
editorial board. The top 100 were selected for the positive influence they have made and continue to make on the transportation systems, utilities, buildings, parks, trails, and communities that Georgia citizens interact with every day.
Ellen Dunham-Jones
(No. 19) - professor and director of the Urban Design Program in the School of Architecture. An authority on sustainable redevelopment and a leading urbanist, Dunham-Jones has published more than 60 articles linking contemporary theory and practice. She serves on several national boards and committees and is former chair of the Board of Congress for the New Urbanism. She conducts workshops that help communities address 21 st
century architectural challenges.
Lauren Stewart
(No. 90) - assistant professor and director of the Structural Engineering and Materials Laboratory, School of Civil and Environmental Engineering. Stewart is an expert in experimental methods for blast and force protection of infrastructure. She’s a National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellow, an Air Force Summer Faculty Fellow, and a member of the New Voices of the National Academies.
Christine Valle
(No. 92) - director of Women in Engineering Program and senior academic professional, Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering. Her doctoral work was in the nondestructive evaluation of advanced materials using linear and nonlinear ultrasonics with computational modeling. Part of Valle’s work revolves around engineering education, and, as a subset, women and minorities issues in engineering education. She has received the Undergraduate Educator Award from Tech’s Center for Excellence in Teaching and Learning.
Kari Edison Watkins
(No. 94) - the Frederick Law Olmsted Associate Professor, School of Civil and Environmental Engineering. Her research includes multi-modal transportation planning and the use of technology in transportation. She won numerous awards for the OneBusAway program, which she co-created for greater Seattle-Tacoma.
Mass Transit
magazine named her to the Top 40 under 40 in 2013, and the Council of University Transportation Centers awarded her the New Faculty Award in 2017.
Additional information:
Story in Engineering Georgia
Additional Images
Related links
Civil & Environmental Engineering article
Contact
Victor Rogers
Institute Communications
Email
victor.rogers@comm.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000