Enjoying Halloween on Campus
Halloween at Georgia Tech includes a bit of everything — fossils, ballroom dancing, costume contests, and pumpkins falling from the top of the Howey Physics Building.
A student holds onto a pumpkin in preparation for the annual School of Physics Pumpkin Drop in 2018
Oct 24, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
Halloween at Georgia Tech includes a bit of everything — fossils, ballroom dancing, costume contests, and pumpkins falling from the top of the Howey Physics Building.
Halloween is Monday, Oct. 31. Activities happening the week leading to and on the big day include:
SMILE Positivity Pumpkins
Oct. 24 – 31
Tech Walkway
Tech Walkway will be transformed into a mini pumpkin patch scattered with pumpkins decorated with positive and encouraging messages. In addition to the decorated pumpkins, there will be blank pumpkins and decoration kits available to make your own positivity pumpkin to add to the patch.
A kickoff takes place Monday, Oct. 24 , where students can stop by to paint a pumpkin.
Event Coordinators Network (ECN) Fall Fest
Oct. 26, 11 a.m. – 1 p.m.
Northside Room, John Lewis Student Center and Stamps Commons
Celebrate the new semester and season at ECN Fall Fest. Take a break in the John Lewis Student Center and enjoy refreshments, paint pumpkins, and have fun with fellow ECN members. Halloween costumes are encouraged to participate in the Fall Fest costume contest. Register
here .
Best Buddies Halloween Party
Oct. 27, 6 – 7 p.m.
Room 2132, Mason Building
Join this student group for a Halloween party with spooky stories, candy, balloons, games, and more.
Fossil Fridays
Oct. 28, 2 – 4 p.m.
Room L1105, Ford ES&T Building
Join the
Spatial Ecology and Paleontology Lab
every Friday this fall for Fossil Fridays. Become a fossil hunter and help discover how vertebrate communities have changed through time.
Learn more about the program .
Vietnamese Student Association (VSA) Horror Movie Night
Oct. 28, 5 – 8 p.m.
Klaus Building Atrium, 1443
If you are up for a scare, join the VSA for Horror Movie Night. This event is BYOR (Bring Your Own Ramen). The group will provide kettles to those who need hot water and complimentary boba for the first 50 members. If you would like to attend, go to Events in the
VSA Discord
and select "interested."
Ballroom Dance Social
Oct. 28, 7 – 10:30 p.m.
Cypress Theater, John Lewis Student Center
Join the
Ballroom Dance Club
for an evening of spooky social dancing. There will be two lessons from 7 – 8 p.m. and social dancing from 8 – 10:30 p.m. Come dressed in your Halloween best to participate in our costume contest. No dance partner or experience required, and no dress code will be enforced.
SCPC Halloween
Oct. 30, 6 – 10 p.m.
Historic Academy of Medicine
Join the Student Center Programs Council (SCPC) for Nightmare on Peachtree Street. The Historic Academy of Medicine will be transformed into a spooky haven with a haunted maze, hypnotist, escape room, and more. Tickets are free.
Bake Sale by Society of Women in Physics
Oct. 31, 2:15 – 4:15 p.m.
Courtyard of Howey Physics Building
The bake sale will offer festive treats leading into the annual pumpkin drop that takes place immediately after.
Pumpkin Drop
Oct. 31, 4:15 – 5:15 p.m.
Howey Physics Building
Pumpkins will be dropped from the top of the Howey Physics Building as part of a fundraiser for the Society of Physics Students. This year will have new decorating options, including pumpkins filled with fake blood.
Purchase a pumpkin for the pumpkin drop .
Halloween Holla 5K
Oct. 31, 7 a.m.
Campus Recreation Center
This annual 5K around campus encourages costumes and includes prizes for top finishers.
ANES Social
Oct. 31, 6 – 9 p.m.
Room 3-47, Boggs Building
Celebrate Halloween with Georgia Tech’s American Nuclear Society.
Additional Images
Contact
Victor Rogers
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000