Enjoy Labor Day Weekend in Atlanta
It’s Labor Day weekend, and for those staying on or near campus, there are plenty of opportunities to enjoy the day off.
DragonCon Parade
Sep 01, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
It’s Labor Day weekend, and for those staying on or near campus, there are plenty of opportunities to enjoy the day off.
Campus will still be lively, and events around the city will bring a festive spirit to the area. Enjoy the weekend and the unofficial start of fall.
On-Campus Events
Invasive Species Removal
Friday, Sept. 2
3 – 5 p.m., The Kendeda Building for Innovative Sustainable Design
Volleyball vs. Dayton
Friday, Sept. 2
8 p.m., O’Keefe Gymnasium
Catholic Student Organization Kickball
Saturday, Sept. 3
10 a.m. – noon
Burger Bowl, Couch Park
Volleyball vs. Arizona State
Saturday, Sept. 3
5 p.m., O’Keefe Gymnasium
Ballroom Dance Club: Fall Into Dance
Saturday, Sept. 3
7 – 10:30 p.m.
Cypress Theater, John Lewis Student Center
Volleyball vs. Florida International University
Sunday, Sept. 4
2 p.m., O’Keefe Gymnasium
Board Game Club
Sunday, Sept. 4
2 – 5 p.m., Room 105, Instructional Center
Around Atlanta
DragonCon
Sept. 2-4
Downtown Atlanta
The annual multimedia and pop culture convention takes place in Atlanta every Labor Day weekend and includes a parade, gaming, art displays, panel discussions, and more.
Braves vs. Marlins
Sept. 2-4
Truist Park
The Braves continue their pursuit of the playoffs with a home series against the Marlins this weekend.
Callaway Gardens Hot Air Balloons and Fireworks
Sept. 2-4
Callaway Gardens
A three-day celebration includes garden and beach access, waterfront activities, and entertainment including a Birds of Prey show. Stay after sundown to watch the beach transform with the light of gigantic, glowing hot air balloons.
Stone Mountain Fun
Sept. 3-5
Stone Mountain Park will have family-friendly attractions all weekend and top it off with the evening Lasershow Spectacular.
TinyCON
Sept. 3-4
Atlanta Children’s Museum
This two-day celebration of fantasy, science fiction, and fictional universes will include potions class, Jedi training, and fun for the whole family.
Kickoff Games Football Fest
Sept. 4
10 a.m. – 5 p.m.
College Football Hall of Fame/Downtown Atlanta
Enjoy a free outdoor festival with inflatables, interactive booths, marching bands, mascots, and other college football fandom.
Noshfest
Sept. 4-5
Temple Kol Emeth will host its free Noshfest featuring Jewish food and culture in the parking lot of the temple at 1415 Old Canton Road in Marietta.
Football: Georgia Tech vs. Clemson
Monday, Sept. 5
8 p.m., Mercedes-Benz Stadium
The Yellow Jackets and Tigers face off in the Chick-fil-A Kickoff Game.
Additional Images
Contact
Kristen Bailey
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000