Enjoy Biketober on Campus, Around Atlanta
October often ushers in cooler fall temperatures and, with them, a renewed interest in getting outdoors. This month, the annual Atlanta Bike Challenge offers a chance to do that on two wheels.
Oct 05, 2020
— Atlanta, GA
October often ushers in cooler fall temperatures and, with them, a renewed interest in getting outdoors. This month, the annual
Atlanta Bike Challenge
offers a chance to do that on two wheels.
The challenge gives participants an opportunity to set up teams, encourage each other to ride, and win prizes for their mileage. Last year, a
Georgia Tech team won the citywide challenge .
It’s also a chance to learn about or get reacquainted with on-campus cycling resources. That includes a Ride Smart class offered by the Georgia Tech Police Department, Campus Recreation, and Parking and Transportation Services, which is now available online. The 12-minute course highlights bicycle and scooter safety and can be accessed via the Bike Georgia Tech  website . At the end of the video, class participants will be directed to complete a short quiz, which will make them eligible to receive a free helmet. The Atlanta Bicycle Coalition
is also offering virtual classes
during the pandemic.
This month, Starter Bikes will host a bike tear-down event on Saturday, Oct. 10, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. in the group’s storage area in the Campus Recreation Center parking deck. Volunteers are sought to help break down bikes for reuse and recycling . The event will help keep frames and parts out of landfills, and allow them to be used in new bike builds someday. Volunteers will be spread out, are required to wear masks, and are encouraged to bring their own work gloves. Those interested can email  bike.gt@gatech.edu .
Georgia Tech’s campus continues to become more bike friendly each year — with validation from the Bicycle Friendly University program, which gave Tech a gold rating in 2016. Tech now has indoor bicycle parking in multiple buildings, bike paths encircling and crisscrossing campus, and several stations of the citywide
Relay Bike Share program . Construction projects continue to improve the riding experience — right now,
a project at Ferst Drive and Sixth Street
is providing better connectivity for cyclists and pedestrians to West Campus housing.
To learn more about campus bicycling resources, including maps and other information, visit
bike.hwb.gatech.edu .
Additional Images
Contact
Kristen Bailey
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000