Enjoying a Safe Winter Break in Atlanta
The break looks a bit different this year as people across the country try to maintain social distancing and avoid large gatherings. That being said, there are still plenty of ways to enjoy the break while still following CDC guidelines.
Snow on Campus
Dec 16, 2020
— Atlanta, GA
Now that finals are over, students have about a month to relax without classes. The break looks a bit different this year as people across the country try to maintain social distancing and avoid large gatherings. That being said, there are still plenty of ways to enjoy the break while still following
CDC guidelines .
Virtual Events
The Final Rose: A
Bachelor/Bachelorette
Discussion
6 p.m. Monday, Dec. 28
BlueJeans
Housing and Residence Life will host a discussion about one of America’s biggest reality TV franchises. With this season of
The Bachelorette
wrapping up on Dec. 22 and the next season of
The Bachelor
starting on Jan. 4, there will be plenty to talk about.
Virtual Trivia: 2020 Themed
5 p.m. Tuesday, Dec. 29
Microsoft Teams
Like trivia? Then join Housing and Residence Life’s Virtual Trivia on Tuesday, Dec. 29. Trivia questions will be centered around the people and events of this year, with other topics thrown in. Let’s take some time to reflect on 2020 and get ready for a new year that we all hope will be better. Georgia Tech prizes will be given to the participants with the highest score. Come along, meet new people, and be a part of the fun. You can RSVP for this event by filling out
this survey .
PianoForte December Virtual Concert: Beethoven 250 Festival
All day Thursday, Dec. 31
PianoForte’s YouTube Channel
Calling all Georgia Tech pianists! Submissions are currently open for PianoForte’s December concert, which will celebrate Beethoven’s 250th birthday with performances of his music. All of the performances will be compiled and put online for a virtual concert. Click
here
to learn more about how to submit a piece and watch the concert.
Pastel Tell-All
7 p.m. Wednesday, Jan. 6, 2021
BlueJeans
Paint and Sip? That is so 2020. Pastel Tell All is the rave in 2021. Join Housing and Residence Life for an artistic hour working with a canvas and pastel. Featured on
@the.art.room on TikTok , we will be doing pastel paintings in a few easy steps. By the end of it, you’ll think it was picked right off the sidewalk in
Mary Poppins . Make sure to
RSVP
ahead of time to secure your spot and find out where to get your free supplies.
In-Person Ideas
Starlight Drive-In Theatre
Hours vary
2000 Moreland Ave. SE, Atlanta
The Starlight Theatre, Atlanta’s very own drive-in, lets you watch new releases from the comfort of your own car. Tickets are $10 per adult and $1 per child in your car. Each ticket is good for two movies, which will play back to back on the same screen. Click
here
to view showtimes.
Skate the Station
Through Jan. 18, 2021
1380 Atlantic Drive NW, Atlanta
Atlantic Station, located near campus, hosts the largest outdoor skating rink in the Southeast. This year, it’s back with Covid-19 protocols in place, including frequent sanitization and reduced capacity on the ice. Entry is $15 per adult and $12 per child, which includes skate rentals. Click
here
to purchase tickets and read more about the rink’s safety rules.
Holiday Light Displays
Hours vary
Across Georgia
With the holidays come extravagant light displays, and Georgia has no shortage, and you can walk or drive through them safely and conveniently.
Atlantic Station
has the one closest to campus, but other metro options include the Atlanta Botanical Garden, Six Flags White Water, and Stone Mountain. Click
here
for information on other holiday light displays around the state.
Additional Images
Contact
Grace Wyner
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000