Ethics Week Returns With Community Engagement Events
One of Georgia Tech’s core values, “We act ethically,” guides our priorities every day.
Ethics Week 2021
Oct 26, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
One of Georgia Tech’s core values, “We act ethically,” guides our priorities every day. But
Ethics Awareness Week
puts a spotlight on that value and the ways we engage ethically around campus.
This year’s events, taking place Nov. 8–12, will be a mix of scheduled in-person, virtual, and hybrid events, daily ethics IQ questions, and in-person ethics tables around campus. Experts  from the
Veterans Resource Center , the
LGBTQIA Resource Center ,
Ethicx , and the
Alumni Association , among others, will join the
Office of Ethics and Compliance
to showcase ethics in a variety of contexts.
Kara Tucker, lead counsel and director of Ethics and Compliance in the Office of the General Counsel, said partnering with campus departments helped create a diverse schedule of events that provides an opportunity for everyone to engage.
“As an organization whose mission is to develop leaders in  our students, faculty, and staff, we know that leading ethically is a critical component. A leader is anyone who influences others, and we aim to create leaders who not only act ethically, but also influence others to act ethically.”
View a full list of the week’s events and chances to win door prizes at
ethicsfirst.gatech.edu/ethicsweek .
A few events to look forward to:
Game Time Mashup With Executive Leadership : President Ángel Cabrera and Executive Vice Presidents Steven McLaughlin, Chaouki Abdallah, and Kelly Fox will go head-to-head playing familiar games with an ethical twist. Nov. 8, 10:30 a.m.
Register to attend.
Sticker Blitz With the Ramblin ’
Wreck:
Visit the Ramblin’ Wreck, take photos, collect vinyl stickers, and receive Ethics First giveaways. Nov. 8, 11 a.m., Exhibition Hall. No registration required.
A
“ Google Chat ”
With Google's Chief Compliance Officer, Spyro Karetsos : Keynote speaker Spyro Karetsos, chief compliance officer at Google, will offer insight about expectations and best practices at Google. Nov. 9, 10 a.m.
Register to attend.
Preparing Future Leaders for Ethical Challenges : An interdisciplinary panel of faculty in biological sciences, civil and environmental engineering, business, and public policy discusses teaching ethics and preparing students for ethical dilemmas in their careers. Nov. 10, 11 a.m.
Register to attend .
Gender Equity From the Perspective of Military Leadership : Examine gender equality and equity in the military through the experiences of two U.S. military members and current Georgia Tech students. They will discuss gender bias and equity, stereotypes, sexism, and how these challenges affect veterans transitioning to civilian life. Nov. 12, 12:30 p.m.
Register to attend .
All in-person and hybrid events  will have giveaways and beverages or light refreshments.
This year, Ethics Awareness Week coincides with the annual online
compliance training
that is required of all employees. The four training modules must be completed by Nov. 19 in the
Georgia Tech Learner Dashboard .
Learn more about ethics at Georgia Tech at
ethicsfirst.gatech.edu .
Additional Images
Contact
Kara Tucker
Ethics and Compliance
Kristen Bailey
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000