Faculty Open the Classroom with C-PIES and HHMI Fellowship
More than 500 Georgia Tech students are taking advantage of self-guided, online math and statistics courses to provide free extra support for students who may need it — on campus and beyond.
Mar 07, 2024
Whether you’re fresh out of high school or going back to school later in life, your first college-level course can be intimidating. And while Georgia Tech offers numerous resources —
drop-in tutoring ,
learning assistants ,
peer-led study groups
— that provide extra support, they aren’t always accessible to everyone.
The Open Course Project aims to address that gap with self-guided, interactive support for math and statistics courses at Georgia Tech — and beyond.
“The Open Course Project was started in order to be an extra resource for students,” says
Stephanie Reikes , a lecturer in the
School of Mathematics
and one of the project’s leaders. “Many students are entering college with gaps in their knowledge due to online learning during the Covid-19 pandemic. I wanted to create a course for students to self-enroll and be able to work at their own pace with the material.”
Support from Howard Hughes Medical Institute
The project was born out of the Inclusive Excellence Faculty Fellowship, established in May 2023 by the College’s
Center for Promoting Inclusion and Equity in the Sciences
(C-PIES). The annual fellowship,
supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute , funds one project proposed by Georgia Tech faculty that promotes inclusive teaching.
Reikes was named a
2023-2024 C-PIES Inclusive Excellence Faculty Fellow
alongside colleagues
Greg Mayer , academic professional in the School of Mathematics; and
Bekki George , former academic professional in the School of Psychology
for the trio's collaborative proposal for the Open Course Project.
Hi Shin Shim , a graduate student in Psychology,
has since joined the team to develop the statistics course.
“The original idea was to promote inclusive teaching in a unique way,” says
Lea Marzo , program director for C-PIES. “We chose this group because their project really homes in on helping students from disadvantaged communities that maybe don’t have basic foundations in these courses.”
With its self-paced material available completely online, Marzo says the courses allow students of any background — and with any schedule — to “get those foundations.”
Opening up the classroom
Development of the Open Course Project began in the summer of 2023, with the first courses launching in the fall. During that time, Reikes, Mayer, and Shim established databases with recorded videos, supplemental notes, and practice problems for
college algebra ,
multivariable calculus , and
statistics .
“Students come to Georgia Tech and find that they need a refresher or that they’re struggling with these courses but can’t necessarily go to tutoring — maybe they’re remote, maybe they work full time, or maybe they’re just not comfortable with in-person tutoring,” Marzo explains. “This gives students another avenue to access this information.”
The online courses are completely self-guided, allowing students to build foundations in these areas from anywhere at their own pace. Enrollment in these courses also provides automatically graded assessments with hundreds of exercises that offer instant feedback to students.
More than 500 Georgia Tech students have enrolled in the courses since the project's launch. To make the materials even more accessible, the team also opened the courses to the general public at no cost.
Publicly available courses currently include
college algebra
and
multivariable calculus , with a statistics course projected to come online sometime this summer.
Because of this, Marzo points out, “any school can use it — and you're essentially getting top level education for free.”
Additional Media
Related links
Sciences Lands Howard Hughes Medical Institute Inclusive Excellence Grant
College Selects Inclusive Excellence Faculty Fellows
Math Lab Solves the Tutoring Support Equation
Contact
Writer:  Audra Davidson
Communications Officer II
College of Sciences
Contact:  Jess Hunt-Ralston
Director of Communications
College of Sciences
Email
jess.hunt@cos.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000