Faculty Honored as National Academy of Inventors Fellows
Three faculty from Georgia Tech have been chosen as 2022 National Academy of Inventors (NAI) Fellows, the highest professional distinction for academic inventors.
From left: Adegboyega "Yomi" Oyelere, Madhavan Swaminathan, Zhong Lin Wang.
Dec 08, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
Three faculty from Georgia Tech have been chosen as 2022
National Academy of Inventors (NAI) Fellows , the highest professional distinction for academic inventors.
The new class of fellows includes
Adegboyega "Yomi" Oyelere
of the College of Sciences, along with
Madhavan Swaminathan
and
Zhong Lin Wang
of the College of Engineering.
They are among approximately
150 honorees
from research universities and governmental and non-profit institutions around the world. They were chosen by the NAI for demonstrating “a highly prolific spirit of innovation in creating or facilitating outstanding inventions that have made a tangible impact on the quality of life, economic development, and welfare of society.”
Oyelere
is a professor in the
School of Chemistry & Biochemistry . His research spans bioorganic chemistry, biochemistry, and drug design with interrelated work across RNA-small molecule interaction, targeted histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition, and design and synthesis of novel bioconjugates for molecular delivery applications.
Oyelere's lab has worked to
develop a therapeutic strategy for cancer treatment
to inhibit enzymes called histone deacetylases, which play an important role in the regulation of gene expression. He has also worked on the design of histone deacetylase inhibitors that can be taken up by the hormones expressed on the surface of hormone-positive breast cancer cells to stop the cells from dividing. In 2018, he received Georgia Tech’s
Outstanding Undergraduate Mentor Senior Faculty Award .
Swaminathan
is the John Pippin Chair in Microsystems Packaging & Electromagnetics in the
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
and has a joint appointment in the
School of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) . He directs the
3D Systems Packaging Research Center
at Georgia Tech. He is an internationally recognized researcher in electronics packaging, an area that is expected to fuel the semiconductor industry over the next decade.
Swaminathan holds 31 patents and is the founder and co-founder of two start-up companies (E-System Design and Jacket Micro Devices).
Wang
is the Regents’ Professor and Hightower Chair Emeritus in MSE. His discovery and breakthroughs in developing nanogenerators established the principle and technological roadmap for harvesting mechanical energy from environment and biological systems for powering mobile sensors.
Wang’s work also p­ioneered the field of self-powered sensors, and he coined piezotronics and piezo-phototronics
for the third-generation semiconductors .
Wang holds 70 U.S. and foreign patents.
Georgia Tech now has 16 NAI Fellows. The new cohort will be inducted at the NAI Fellows Induction Ceremony in July.
Additional Images
Related links
CoE Newsroom: Swaminathan, Wang Honored as National Academy of Inventors Fellows
Contact
Jason Maderer
Jess Hunt-Ralston
Email
jess@cos.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000