Film Production Coming to Campus
Starting this weekend, there will be filming near Bobby Dodd Stadium, and the campus community should be aware of a few potential disruptions.
Oct 21, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
For many years, Georgia Tech has been a much sought-after location for film productions, and since campus has resumed more of its pre-pandemic activities, filming is back. Starting this weekend, there will be filming near Bobby Dodd Stadium, and the campus community should be aware of a few potential disruptions.
Beginning at 7 a.m. on Sunday, Oct. 23,
Tech Tower Lawn
will be closed and will reopen at 8 p.m. on Tuesday, Oct. 25. During this time, pedestrians will need to choose an alternative route around this space.
In addition, the
Callaway Plaza
on the north side of Bobby Dodd stadium will be closed from 6 to 10 a.m. on Monday, Oct. 24. Athletes may still enter and exit the Edge Building; however, they should expect brief delays.
The following roads will have partial closures on Monday, Oct. 24.
A portion of
Bobby Dodd Way , from Fowler Street NW to Techwood Drive NW, will be closed to vehicle traffic from 6 to 10 a.m.
A portion of
Brittain Drive , from the alleyway at Alpha Chi Omega House to Bobby Dodd Way, will be closed to vehicle traffic from 5 to 10 a.m.
Pedestrian and bicycle traffic in these areas may also be delayed. Please consider an alternative route, or plan for additional time if you need to pass through these areas.
Parking in the nearby areas will also be affected as follows:
Lot E-46 Surface Lot
and the
Centennial Olympic Park Gravel Lot
will be closed Sunday, Oct. 23 through Tuesday, Oct. 25, and will reopen Wednesday, Oct. 26.
Parking spaces on the south end of
Brittain Drive
will be unavailable on Monday, Oct. 24.
Peters Parking Deck
will have limited availability on Monday, Oct. 24.
Parking and Transportation is reaching out to permit holders in these locations with additional information on alternative parking.
Additional Images
Contact
Julie Birchfield
Assistant Director, Film Logistics and Business Development
Auxiliary Services Operations
Division of Student Engagement and Well-Being
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000