Finalists Chosen in the Vice Provost for Undergraduate Education Search
Two finalists chosen in the search for Georgia Tech's next vice provost for Undergraduate Education.
Steven Girardot and Stephen Ruffin named as finalists in the search for the next vice provost for Undergraduate Education.
Feb 10, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
Two finalists have been chosen in the search for Georgia Tech’s next vice provost for Undergraduate Education. As part of the final selection process, each candidate will present a seminar on their vision for the role. Any interested Georgia Tech student, faculty, or staff member can watch the hour-long seminars virtually in real time or watch a post-event video.
The finalists are listed below in order of their virtual seminar presentations:
Steven Girardot , interim vice provost for Undergraduate Education —
Thursday, Feb. 17, from 9 to 10 a.m.
Stephen Ruffin , professor and associate chair for Undergraduate Programs in the Daniel Guggenheim School of Aerospace Engineering, director of the Georgia Tech University Center of Exemplary Mentoring, and director of the NASA Georgia Space Grant Consortium —
Friday, Feb. 18, from 9 to 10 a.m.
Additional details, including each candidate’s curriculum vitae, seminar link, and feedback survey can be found by clicking on the names above. Survey forms for the candidates will be available through 5 p.m. on Tuesday, Feb. 22. Find more details on the
search site .
As the leader of the Office of Undergraduate Education, the vice provost manages Institute policies affecting undergraduate students and has oversight of the units and personnel that report into Georgia Tech’s Academic Engagement Programs, Tutoring and Academic Support, Retention Initiatives, Undergraduate Advising, Honors Program, Serve-Learn-Sustain, and the Career Center. The position will report to Laurence J. Jacobs, the newly announced senior vice provost for Education and Learning.
Additional Images
Contact
Office of the Provost
Email
provostsoffice@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000