Finalists Chosen for Vice Provost for International Initiatives
Four finalists chosen in the search for the next vice provost for International Initiatives will present at an open seminar.
Tech Tower
May 14, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
Four finalists have been chosen in the search for the next vice provost for International Initiatives. The search follows the announcement by Yves Berthelot, the current vice provost for International Initiatives, that he will be retiring June 30 after 36 years of service to Georgia Tech.
As part of the final selection process, each candidate will present at an hour-long open seminar on the theme “Connecting Globally: Achieving Georgia Tech’s International Vision.” Candidate seminars are open to all students, faculty, and staff. Those wishing to attend any of the seminars can do so
virtually here , safely attend in person, or watch a post-event video.
The finalists are listed below in order of their campus seminar presentations, which will all be held from
11 a.m. to noon in Clough 152 :
Bernard J. Kippelen , Joseph M. Pettit Professor in the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, will present an open seminar on
Monday, May 17 .
Michael L. Best , professor in the Sam Nunn School of International Affairs and the School of Interactive Computing, will present an open seminar on
Tuesday, May 18 .
Anna Westerstahl Stenport , professor and chair in the School of Modern Languages, will present an open seminar on
Wednesday, May 19 .
Ghassan AlRegib , John and Marilu McCarty Chair in the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, will present an open seminar on
Thursday, May 20 .
Additional details, including each candidate’s curriculum vitae and links to the seminar videos and surveys, can be found on the Vice Provost for International Initiatives
search website . Survey forms will be accessible through midnight on Monday, May 24.
Additional Images
Contact
Michael Toney , Director of Academic Administration
Office of the Provost
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000