Finalists Chosen in Searches for Senior Vice Provost for Education and Learning and Vice Provost for Faculty
Finalists have been chosen in the searches for two newly created positions within the Georgia Tech Office of the Provost.
Finalists for Senior Vice Provost for Education and Learning (top L to R): Mary Lynn Realff, Ellen Zegura, and Laurence "Larry" Jacobs. Finalists for vice provost for Faculty (bottom L to R): Ana "Annie" Antón, Dawn Baunach, and Michelle Rinehart
Jan 05, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
Finalists have been chosen in the searches for the senior vice provost for Education and Learning and the vice provost for Faculty, two newly created positions within the Georgia Tech Office of the Provost.
Announced in October 2021, the new structure, in alignment with the Institute strategic plan, is centered on the student and faculty experience, with the goal of creating a transformative learning and teaching environment focused on strategic values, support services, and excellence in educational operations.
As part of the final selection processes, candidates will present hourlong seminars on their vision for the respective roles. The virtual seminars are open to all Georgia Tech students, faculty, and staff. Interested individuals can watch virtually in real time or watch a post-event recording of each candidate presentation.
Senior Vice Provost for Education and Learning
The senior vice provost for Education and Learning will provide dedicated operational leadership and strategic oversight of the student educational and learning experience for both undergraduate and graduate education.
Three finalists have been chosen for the position and are listed below in order of their campus seminar presentations.
Mary Lynn Realff,  associate chair for Undergraduate Programs in the School of Materials Science and Engineering and co-director of the Center for Women, Science, and Technology, will present a virtual seminar on
Monday, Jan. 10, from 9 to 10 a.m.
Ellen Zegura,  Regents Professor and Stephen Fleming Chair in the School of Computer Science and executive co-director of Serve-Learn-Sustain, will present a virtual seminar on
Tuesday, Jan. 11, from 9 to 10 a.m.
Laurence “Larry” Jacobs,
associate dean for Academic Affairs in the College of Engineering and professor in the School of Civil and Environmental Engineering, will present a virtual seminar on
Wednesday, Jan. 12, from 8 to 9 a.m.
Vice Provost for Faculty
The vice provost for Faculty will provide direct supervision of faculty support services within the Office of the Provost and provide leadership in promoting and ensuring excellence within the faculty.
Three finalists have been chosen for the position and are listed below in order of their campus seminar presentations.
Ana “Annie” Antón,  professor in the School of Interactive Computing and ADVANCE Professor in the College of Computing, will present a virtual seminar on
NEW DATE:   Tuesday, Jan. 18, from 9 to 10 a.m.
Dawn Baunach,  associate vice provost for Graduate Education and Faculty Development, will present a virtual seminar on
Friday, Jan. 14, from 9 to 10 a.m.
Michelle Rinehart,  associate dean for Academic Affairs and Outreach in the College of Design, will present a virtual seminar on
Wednesday, Jan. 19, from 9 to 10 a.m.
For additional details on both searches, including each candidate’s curriculum vitae, links to attend candidate seminars, and feedback surveys, please visit the respective search websites:
Senior Vice Provost for Education and Learning Search
Vice Provost for Faculty Search
Additional Images
Contact
Office of the Provost
Email
provostsoffice@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000