FireHUD Wins the 2016 InVenture Prize
Wobble took home second place. TruePani named fan favorite.
FireHUD, a device to help keep firefighters safe, won the 2016 InVenture Prize at Georgia Tech. The inventors – Zachary Braun, a computer engineering major, and Tyler Sisk, an electrical engineering major – won $20,000 plus a free patent filing and a spot in Flashpoint.Wobble, an automated balance test to assess athletes following concussions, finished in second. The inventors are: Hailey Brown, mechanical engineering; Matthew Devlin, biomedical engineering; Ana Gomez del Campo, biomedical engineering;
Mar 17, 2016
— Atlanta, GA
A device that helps firefighters track their vital signs while fighting fires won the 2016 InVenture Prize. The two-person team behind FireHUD invented a real-time monitoring system and Head Up Display that provides biometric and environmental data to firefighters and officials outside. The goal is to decrease the level of uncertainty firefighters face. The inventors – Zachary Braun, a computer engineering major, and Tyler Sisk, an electrical engineering major – won $20,000 plus a free patent filing and a spot in Flashpoint, a Georgia Tech accelerator that helps company founders think about their business model and formation. The two will now represent Georgia Tech at the inaugural ACC InVenture Prize. This competition, which will involve student startups and inventions from each of the 15 universities in the Atlantic Coast Conference, will take place at Georgia Tech April 5 and 6. The Georgia Tech students behind Wobble finished second Wednesday night and scored $10,000, a free patent filing and a spot in Flashpoint. Wobble is an automated balance test to assess athletes following concussions. The device would keep athletes safe and reduce the risk of permanent brain damage. The inventors are: Hailey Brown, mechanical engineering; Matthew Devlin, biomedical engineering; Ana Gomez del Campo, biomedical engineering; and Garrett Wallace, biomedical engineering. TruePani walked away with $5,000 as winners of the People’s Choice Award, which goes to the fans’ favorite invention. This all-female team designed an antimicrobial cup and water storage device that makes drinking water safer. The social entrepreneurs came up with the device after two of the team members traveled across India. The inventors are: Samantha Becker, civil engineering; Sarah Lynn Bowen, business administration; Naomi Ergun, business administration; and Shannon Evanchec, environmental engineering. The InVenture Prize brings together student innovators from all academic backgrounds across campus in an effort to foster creativity, invention and entrepreneurship. More than 500 students signed up for this year’s contest. They were narrowed to the six teams that competed in the finale, which was broadcast live on Georgia Public Broadcasting. Learn more about all six finalists
here .
Additional Images
Related links
Inventure
ACC InVenture Prize
Contact
Laura Diamond Media Relations  404-894-6016
Email
laura.diamond@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000