First Cohort Announced for Ascend Faculty Professional Development Program
Ascend, a new career development program for mid-career faculty, launched its cohort for Spring 2024.
Jan 16, 2024
Ascend, a new career development program for mid-career faculty, launched its cohort for Spring 2024. Supported by the Office of Faculty Professional Development, Ascend cohort members include academic professionals and lecturers from across campus.
The cohort will build on current strengths and successes and explore ways to thrive mid-career and in the future. Using a faculty learning community model and the Appreciative Inquiry framework, participants will explore their interests, values, and goals, and create an actionable, individual strategic plan while developing skills for career growth and leadership.
Members of the first cohort include:
Whitney Buser - Director of Master’s Programs and Associate Director of Academic Programs, School of Economics
Melissa Foulger - Artistic Director for DramaTech, School of Literature, Media, and Communication
Laura Sams Haynes - Director of Outreach, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Mary Holder - Director of Neuroscience Program, Undergraduate Studies, School of Psychology
Christopher Jankowski - Director of Graduate Advising and Assessment, Director of Postdoctoral Teaching Effectiveness, School of Mathematics
Ashley McKeen - EXCEL Senior Lecturer, CEISMC
Nicoly Myles - Director of the Center for Academics, Success, & Equity (CASE), School of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Amanda Nolen - Faculty Teaching and Learning Specialist, Center for Teaching and Learning
Matt Nusnbaum - Senior Academic Professional, Undergraduate Program in Neuroscience
Daniela Staiculescu - Senior Academic Professional, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Cassie Thomas - Associate Director of Undergraduate Transition Seminars, Office of Undergraduate Education
Ruthie Yow - Associate Director, Center for Sustainable Communities Research and Development.
Participants in this program will learn to use the Appreciative Inquiry model to develop a personal development plan that includes a vision and mission; goals for personal learning, professional development, and career momentum; and an action plan. The program is designed to support faculty as they practice skills essential for collegiality and leadership in a cohort environment and explore opportunities for growth and career vitality at Georgia Tech. Participants will also take advantage of four professional coaching sessions during the calendar year with International Coaching Federation-accredited Director of the Office of Faculty Professional Development Rebecca Pope-Ruark.
Learn more about the Ascend program.
Related links
Ascend Mid-Career Development Program for APL Faculty
Contact
Rebecca Pope-Ruark
Director of the Office of Faculty Professional Development
Email
rpoperuark3@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000