Fourth Cohort Set for Diversity and Inclusion Fellows Program
The fourth cohort of the Diversity and Inclusion Fellows Program are set to begin program Sept. 24, 2020.
Sep 11, 2020
— Atlanta, GA
With support from
Institute Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion  and the ADVANCE Program, the  Diversity and Inclusion Fellows Program  brings together faculty, staff, and students who individually and collectively advance their action, research, or teaching objectives while improving inclusivity at Georgia Tech.
The fourth cohort will begin the program on Sept. 24, 2020. Fellows will be expected to complete an individual or group action, teaching, or research objective and share with the campus community before the program’s completion next April. This year’s program received an astounding 151 applications.
“The Diversity and Inclusion Fellows program allows us to harness energy and ideas that emerge from the fellows’ projects as we work to implement changes to co-create a more inclusive environment where we can all thrive," said Terry Blum, Scheller College of Business professor and Tedd Munchak Chair in Entrepreneurship; director for the Institute for Leadership and Social Impact; and
recently appointed ADVANCE professor .
“So many members of the Georgia Tech community are committed to inclusion and equity,” added Martha Grover, professor and associate chair for Graduate Studies in the School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering. “I am glad to join the program, which brings these fellows together, with their own passion and innovative ideas, and empowers them to work together and synthesize their ideas to change policies and enact new programs.” Grover was
recently named the ADVANCE professor for the College of Engineering .
Blum and Grover will co-direct the program this year.
The Diversity and Inclusion Fellows Program was created in 2017 with goals of cultivating a network of campus ambassadors who will advance a culture of inclusive excellence and to create an environment where community members feel safe, comfortable, and empowered to discuss diversity and inclusion at Tech.
Applicants were asked to submit an idea an issue area or project idea for diversity and inclusion such as developing recommendations and content for new institutional training programs and collating best practices for increasing diversity or enhancing inclusion of a given campus group.
The 2020 cohort include: Sinet Adous, Anabel Alfonso, Jalen Borne, Joshua Burr, Dian Chung, Juan-Pablo Correa-Baena, Kenneth Cunefare, Giovani Galicia, Corey Goergen, Emily Grubert, Laura Haynes, Tiffany Johnson, Kyriaki Kalaitzidou, Shiraz Karaa, Dani Lechner, Michael LiBretto, Matthew Lim, Kimberly Molina-Veronico, Susana Morris, Kim Paige, Robert “Trey” Quinn, Devesh Ranjan, Vicki Rogers, Chris Rozell, Nancy Sandlin, Sania Shikh, Hannah Sherrill, Brandi Simula, Julie Sonnerberg-Klein, and Brandy Stanfield-Nagel.
To learn more about the fourth cohort, visit
https://diversity.gatech.edu/2020-diversity-and-inclusion-fellows-bios .
Additional Images
Related links
Terry Blum and Martha Grover Join ADVANCE Program
Contact
Courtney Hill
Communications Manager
Institute Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
courtney.hill@gatech.edu
Email
courtney.hill@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000