Frank Neville Named President of Millsaps College
A member of Tech’s executive leadership team and president’s cabinet since 2019, Neville played a key role in crafting the Institute’s current strategic plan and continues to oversee the implementation process
Jan 17, 2024
Frank Neville, senior vice president for Strategic Initiatives and chief of staff for the Office of the President, has been named president of Millsaps College.
A member of Tech’s executive leadership team and president’s cabinet since 2019, Neville played a key role in crafting the Institute’s current strategic plan and continues to oversee the implementation process for the strategic initiatives that have grown out of the plan. He also led the campus response during the Covid-19 pandemic and served as interim director of Athletics during its transition.
“I have been fortunate to have had Frank by my side as a trusted partner for the last two decades,” said President Ángel Cabrera. “We have worked together in three different institutions and grown together as leaders. Whatever I have accomplished, I owe in great part to him. Yet it is heartening to see a colleague of his caliber advance in his career, and I am delighted that Millsaps has recognized his extraordinary experience and character with this choice.”
Before joining Georgia Tech, Neville served as chief of staff at George Mason University, overseeing university counsel, internal audit, and intercollegiate athletics. Concurrently, he held the position of vice president for Communications and Marketing during the last two years of his tenure. Additionally, he served as board chair and later vice chair for Mason Korea, governing the university's campus in Incheon, South Korea, and taught cross-cultural management and global business as an adjunct faculty member in the School of Business.
Prior to George Mason, Neville was the vice president of Global Communications and Public Affairs at Thunderbird School of Global Management, managing the school's global reputation, rankings, advisory boards, and global outreach initiatives. Before his career in higher education, he was a distinguished diplomat with the U.S. Department of State, serving in various locations and gaining recognition as the most decorated foreign service officer under the age of 40 at the time of his resignation.
Located in Jackson, Mississippi, Millsaps College is a private liberal arts college.
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000