Georgia Tech hires health IT leader
Associate vice president will oversee research, economic development
Feb 03, 2014
— Atlanta, GA
Georgia Tech has selected Margaret Wagner Dahl, a veteran of research commercialization and technology-based economic development, to serve as associate vice president for Health IT. In this position, Dahl will lead the development and expansion of Georgia Tech’s efforts within the health information technology industry. She also will oversee educational, consulting and other services to fuel economic development and improve health services delivery in Georgia. “Georgia Tech is a leader in using the latest research and thinking to solve world problems,” Dahl said. “There are tough challenges facing this country, and I’m excited about the role we will play in guaranteeing access to healthcare that is safe, affordable and high quality.” Dahl has worked for nearly 30 years in technology transfer and has extensive expertise in the biomedical industry and healthcare governance. She is a trustee of the American Hospital Association Council on Governance and is chairwoman of the Board of Trustees for the Athens Regional Medical Center. She previously worked for the University of Georgia, where her duties included leading the Georgia BioBusiness Center, an incubator that helps UGA faculty members turn research into commercial ventures.  “Margaret possesses a unique set of expertise that will assist Georgia Tech and the healthcare industry across Georgia and the country,” said Stephen Fleming, a vice president at Georgia Tech. Dahl’s position will be part of Georgia Tech’s Enterprise Innovation Institute, which helps Georgia enterprises improve their competitiveness through the application of science, technology and innovation. She will help Georgia Tech build on existing efforts within the health information technology industry and reach into new areas, said Fleming, who oversees the Enterprise Innovation Institute. Dahl will also work closely with the Georgia Tech Research Institute and the Institute for People and Technology. She begins her new position Feb. 3.
Contact
Laura Diamond  Georgia Tech Media Relations 404-894-6016
Email
laura.diamond@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000