Georgia Tech’s Technology Square Phase III to Include Scheller Tower
A new building in Tech Square Phase III to be named Scheller Tower
Aug 22, 2019
— Atlanta, GA
The next phase of Georgia Tech’s Technology Square project is moving forward with the recent announcement of Scheller Tower — a new building for the Ernest Scheller Jr. College of Business in Tech Square Phase III, expected to open by the end of 2022. Roberta and Ernest Scheller Jr. made a generous philanthropic commitment in support of this next phase of the initiative.
“Scheller Tower will become the new home for our MBA and Executive Education programs, and it paves the way for Scheller College of Business at Georgia Tech to continue its momentum and success as a leading business school of the 21st century,” said aid Maryam Alavi, dean and Stephen P. Zelnak Chair of Scheller College. “We appreciate the generous and unwavering support from the Schellers, and we look forward to Scheller Tower’s opening in 2022.”
Last spring, Georgia Tech received approval from the Board of Regents, the state legislature, and Gov. Brian Kemp to provide state funding for the architectural design of Tech Square Phase III to begin this fall. Pending full project funding and approval by the Board of Regents and the governor, construction could begin as early as the summer of 2020 and could conclude by the end of 2022.
Tech Square Phase III will be located on the northwest corner of West Peachtree Street and Fifth Street and will include an additional tower for the H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, as well as for other programming.
Georgia Tech’s Technology Square opened in 2003. One of the area’s guiding principles is to foster a better connection between the Institute and the business community. Today, the area is a thriving innovation ecosystem thanks to a network of students, faculty, researchers, startup entrepreneurs, and global corporations.
About Scheller College of Business
Established more than a century ago, Georgia Tech’s Scheller College of Business has a distinguished history as part of a world-renowned technological research university. Strategically positioned at the intersection of business and technology, Scheller College is internationally recognized as a leader in business education, offering highly ranked bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral degree programs as well as certificates and minors. Located in the heart of midtown Atlanta’s Technology Square − home to over 100 startups and more than 50 accelerators and incubators − Scheller College offers its students the unparalleled opportunity to learn in an exciting, innovative ecosystem. Students have hands-on, experiential learning opportunities and access to local executives and Fortune 500 innovation centers (including Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield, AT&T, Delta Air Lines, and NCR). Here, they can learn from successful entrepreneurs and participate in business challenges with some of the world’s leading companies. More information can be found online at: scheller.gatech.edu.
Additional Images
Contact
Denise Ward
404.385.2966
Email
denise.ward@comm.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000