Georgia Tech Hosts Opening Event for Atlanta Science Festival
Science and Engineering Day aims to inspire the next generation of engineers and scientists and share the breadth and impact of Georgia Tech’s research with the local community.
Mar 05, 2024
This weekend, the annual
Atlanta Science Festival
kicks off with
Georgia Tech Science and Engineering Day . From 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. on Saturday, March 9, the Institute will host STEAM activities for the whole family. A two-week celebration of STEAM education and career opportunities, ASF offers more than 100 events and demonstrations hosted around the city for people of all ages.
Science and Engineering Day aims to inspire the next generation of engineers and scientists and share the breadth and impact of Georgia Tech’s research with the local community. The theme of this year’s event is space and includes appearances by former
NASA astronaut Shane Kimbrough , M.S. ISyE 1998, who has spent an astounding 388 days in space.
Attendees will lift off from the Launch Pad — The Kendeda Building for Innovative Sustainable Design — where they will receive a “Galactic Passport” to guide their journey through the Georgia Tech universe. Each planet, or building, will house multiple hands-on activities, all led by Georgia Tech students, researchers, faculty, and staff. There will be more than
50 interactive exhibits
for attendees to experience.
Following Science and Engineering Day, the
Neuro Next Initiative
at Georgia Tech will co-host with Emory University a
film screening
and
live performance
that combines neuroscience research with movement and insights into the experience of people living with Parkinson’s and dementia. These interactive events include acrobats from the Centre for Circus Arts Research, Innovation and Knowledge Transfer (CRITAC), the research arm of the Canadian National Circus School.
Atlanta Science Festival is engineered by  Science ATL , a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization dedicated to bringing people together through the wonder of science. Founded in 2014 by Emory University, Georgia Tech, and Metro Atlanta Chamber, the organization produces  year-round science events , including the Atlanta Science Festival, a youth STEM leadership program, school STEM partnership initiatives, self-guided family activities such as Passport and Discovery Walks, and more.
Related links
Science and Engineering Day Buzzes with Excitement
Georgia Tech Science and Engineering Day – Inspiring the Next Generation of Inn…
Contact
researchevents@gatech.edu
Email
researchevents@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000