Georgia Tech Entrepreneurship Programs and Activities Featured in IEEE Potentials
The May/June 2021 issue of IEEE Potentials introduces engineering entrepreneurship in both academic and corporate settings to the magazine’s readers, which are primarily undergraduate and graduate student members of IEEE and young professionals.
May 20, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
The May/June 2021 issue of
IEEE Potentials
introduces engineering entrepreneurship in both academic and corporate settings to the magazine’s readers, which are primarily undergraduate and graduate student members of IEEE and young professionals.
The articles in this issue–mostly written by faculty and staff from six units at the Georgia Institute of Technology and by two of its alumni–consistently underscore the working definition of entrepreneurship. They also demonstrate and highlight strategies and programs that are formative for engineering entrepreneurship as well as intrapreneurship, the corporate analog of entrepreneurship. These articles include:
An introduction to entrepreneurship
by Pamela Bhatti
Academic entrepreneurship
by Pamela Bhatti and Srini Tridandapani
CREATE-X: Toward student entrepreneurial confidence
by Craig R. Forest, Raghupathy Sivakumar, Raymond P. Vito, Rahul Saxena, Joyelle Harris, Rhea Perkins, Desta Davidson, Karthik Ramachandran, Keith McGreggor, Olufisayo Omojokun, Christopher Klaus, and Steven W. McLaughlin
Building entrepreneurial confidence
by Gregory Mihalik and Henry Owen
Coaching students and teams to listen to customer needs
by Sara Martin Henderson, Leah Attruia, and Melissa Bolen Heffner
Would you be interested in a corporate startup?
by Mike Tinskey
For those who are interested in reading the articles and are unable to sign in with member access or institutional sign in, please visit the
IEEE Xplore subscriptions page .
Related links
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Enterprise Innovation Institute
George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering
College of Computing
Scheller College of Business
Provost's Office
Georgia Tech
IEEE Potentials
Contact
Jackie Nemeth
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Email
jackie.nemeth@ece.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000