Georgia Tech Students Featured During CNN Primetime Debate
Josh Jacob and Ashley Tofil submitted questions selected by CNN to be asked to GOP presidential candidates.
Josh Jacob and Ashley Tofil, students in the Sam Nunn school of International Affairs at Georgia Tech, were selected by CNN to have their questions asked during a primetime CNN GOP debate.
Dec 16, 2015
— Atlanta, GA
Georgia Tech students were in the spotlight during last night’s GOP debate on CNN. Earlier this month, CNN traveled the country in a campaign camper to allow people to film questions that might be used in future debates. Of the three questions selected for candidates in Tuesday night’s primetime debate, two of them came from Georgia Tech students. Both of the featured Yellow Jackets are students in the Sam Nunn School of International Affairs, a division of Georgia Tech’s Ivan Allen College of Liberal Arts. The first came from international affairs major Josh Jacob from Johns Creek. He first introduced himself as a Georgia Tech student before launching into his question. “Recently Donald Trump mentioned that we must kill the families of ISIS members. However, this violates the principle of distinction between civilians and combatants in international law,” Jacob began. “So my question is: How would killing innocent civilians set us apart from ISIS?” The response on social media after his question was quick and positive. “Can I vote for the Georgia Tech student for president? Most direct statement all night.” Said @KenzieTheIntern on Twitter. Twitter user @sckozub said, “Guy from Georgia Tech coming in with the best question of the night.” When asked why he chose the question he did, Jacob says the answer is simple. “I feel many GOP candidates tend to ignore international law when they pontificate about war.” Jacob says he had no previous knowledge that his question had been selected, and was shocked when his face appeared on national television. He also credits an experience at Tech for helping him come up with a question. “I studied abroad in the Europe. We went on a number of site visits to national parliaments and international institutions. I credit that experience with sharpening my ability to ask concise but incisive questions,” Jacob says.  Only minutes after Jacob’s appearance came another Georgia Tech student’s recorded question. Ashley Tofil, a student in the modern languages program, was also surprised to see herself on television. She directed her question to Carly Fiorina, who recently made a campaign stop at Georgia Tech. “Ms. Fiorina, In November you said that you would not talk to Vladimir Putin after you were elected because you would be communicating from a position of weakness,” she started. “Do you believe it is feasible to not communicate with another world leader and do you think that is also a sign of weakness?” she asked. Fiorina then went on to explain that she would not cut off all communication with Putin, but that now was not the time to engage with him. “It wasn’t a bad response,” says Tofil. “I think that not talking to Putin and walking away from the negotiating table when necessary are two different things,” she says. The social media praise continued after Tofil’s question. “Shoutout to Georgia Tech students for being politically aware and asking legit questions. #GOPDebate” Sara Edwards posted on her Twitter account. Both Jacob and Tofil are beaming about their inclusion in the national conversation. “There were hundreds of provocative and interesting questions asked by students from other colleges, so to have two out of the three questions come specifically from the Nunn School is certainly an honor,” Jacob says. “I’m always proud to represent Georgia Tech,” says Tofil.
Additional Images
Contact
Steven Norris Social Media Manager
Email
snorris@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000