Georgia Tech Wins Real Estate Visionary Award
Honor from the Atlanta Business Chronicle recognizes the development and continued success of Technology Square.
Georgia Tech's Technology Square is home to a growing innovation ecosystem of startup companies, innovation centers from established companies and research from Institute students, faculty and staff.
Mar 03, 2017
— Atlanta, GA
Georgia Tech was honored Thursday evening for the innovative and successful development of Technology Square. The Institute received the Visionary Award in the Atlanta Business Chronicle’s 2017 Best in Atlanta Real Estate Awards.
Tech Square officially opened in 2003, and today the area is a thriving
innovation ecosystem
thanks to a vibrant network of students, faculty, researchers, startup entrepreneurs and global corporations.
One of the area’s guiding principles was to foster a better connection between the Institute and the business community.
President G.P. “Bud” Peterson discussed this connection in the fall during a
roundtable event
with a handful of corporate executives from companies that opened innovation centers in Tech Square. Currently, 14
corporate innovation centers
are clustered in the area.
The area’s growth will only continue between
construction of Coda , which represents the next phase of Tech Square, and the recent
purchase of the Biltmore .
“Tech Square will continue to be a hub of innovation for the Southeast, and I think we’ll see continued strong growth as the word gets out that it is the place to be,” Peterson
told the Atlanta Business Chronicle . “We are grateful to those who first saw the potential of Tech Square before the first shovel full of dirt was moved, and to those who have worked to create one of the most vibrant and creative innovation regions in the southeastern United States.”
Additional Images
Related links
The Innovation Ecosystem at Georgia Tech
Contact
Laura Diamond
Media Relations
404-894-6016
@LauraRDiamond
Email
laura.diamond@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000