Georgia Tech Launches Climate Action Planning Process
Georgia Tech strives to be a leader in climate action across the Institute’s operational, educational, research, and economic development missions.
Jan 10, 2023
— Atlanta, GA
Georgia Tech strives to be a leader in climate action across the Institute’s operational, educational, research, and economic development missions. As such, a process is underway to leverage this knowledge and develop a comprehensive, cross-cutting Climate Action Plan.
The Climate Action Plan, a key deliverable of the
Sustainability Next Plan , will support the Georgia Tech strategic plan efforts to
lead by example
in solving some of the most pressing issues of our time. Once developed, this plan will lay the pathway forward for the Institute to achieve its climate goals, including reaching carbon neutrality by 2050.
About the Process
The planning process launched last year and will extend through 2023. Led by Infrastructure and Sustainability, the process will include developing a greenhouse gas inventory, modeling potential mitigation strategies, and engaging with faculty, students, and staff from across campus. The engagement process will include an advisory task force and individual working groups that focus on specific climate solutions. Once complete, the plan will align with Georgia Tech’s broader commitments to address climate change and provide an actionable roadmap to achieving carbon neutrality and climate justice.
Get Involved
The Georgia Tech campus community is invited to take part in helping to develop the Climate Action Plan. Reach out to
sustain@gatech.edu
to express your interest. For additional information on the Climate Action Plan and other sustainability efforts across campus, please follow the Office of Campus Sustainability on
Instagram
and
Facebook
and visit
sustain.gatech.edu .
Additional Images
Related links
Sustainability Next Plan Virtual Town Hall
Contact
Abby Bower
Program Support Coordinator
Office of Campus Sustainability
Infrastructure and Sustainability
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000