Georgia Tech to Host Fall In-Person Commencement Ceremonies
Graduates were notified last week that Georgia Tech will hold in-person ceremonies for Commencement this December. Spring, Summer, and Fall 2020 graduates are all invited to participate.
Georgia Tech Ph.D. Graduate Regalia
Oct 05, 2020
— Atlanta, GA
Graduates
were notified last week
that Georgia Tech will hold in-person ceremonies for Commencement this December. Spring, Summer, and Fall 2020 graduates are all invited to participate.
Ceremonies will be held Dec. 11 and 12 at Bobby Dodd Stadium. The location is based on guidance from the Governor’s Covid-19 Task Force, the Georgia Department of Public Health, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which encourages outdoor spaces for larger public events such as Commencement. A venue of this size will allow for appropriate physical distancing — and one of the best views of the city from campus.
Students are required to RSVP to attend and receive guest tickets, and the RSVP window will open Monday, Oct. 19. All ceremonies will be ticketed, and students will receive five guest tickets each. No day-of tickets will be provided.
All 2020 graduates are invited to walk in either the fall ceremony or Spring 2021 ceremonies.
Students have been assigned a ceremony based on their degree level and graduating semester:
Ceremony 1 – Spring and summer bachelor’s and master’s students
Friday, December 11, at 2 p.m.
Ceremony 2 – Fall master’s students and spring, summer, and fall Ph.D. students
Saturday, December 12, at 9 a.m.
Ceremony 3 – Fall bachelor’s students
Saturday, December 12, at 2 p.m.
The outside ceremony is a rain or shine event. All ceremonies will be livestreamed and will also be available for viewing after the event. Guests who are at high risk for severe illness due to Covid-19 are encouraged to participate via livestream.
To accommodate physical distancing and other public health guidelines, some modifications to the ceremony may be necessary. These include but are not limited to:
No student processional.
Physically distanced seating for students and guests.
Students will still be individually recognized at the ceremony but will not participate in the traditional handshake with leadership or be hooded by their advisor.
Face coverings required while inside the stadium.
More information will be shared with graduates via email, as well as at
commencement.gatech.edu , as the event gets closer.
Additional Images
Related links
Fall 2020 Commencement FAQs
Contact
Special Events and Protocol
events@comm.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000