Georgia Tech to Launch State’s First Master’s Program Focused Exclusively on Sustainability
The degree program will help educate the next generation of sustainability leaders for corporations, government, and non-governmental organizations.
Georgia Institute of Technology's new Master of Sustainable Energy and Environmental Management (MSEEM) is the only graduate degree in Georgia fully dedicated to sustainability issues.
Mar 04, 2019
— Atlanta, GA
The Georgia Institute of Technology is launching a new Master of Sustainable Energy and Environmental Management (MSEEM) — the only graduate degree in Georgia fully dedicated to sustainability issues.
The highly technical, science-based, and interdisciplinary program — approved by the Board of Regents on Feb. 12, 2019 — will prepare students to deliver fact-based policy expertise through robust analytical techniques and a deep understanding of energy and environmental issues and sustainability practices.
“This professionally focused degree will allow Georgia Tech to educate the next generation of sustainability leaders in corporate, government, and non-governmental organizations,” said Rafael L. Bras, provost and executive vice president for Academic Affairs and K. Harrison Brown Family Chair. “Georgia Tech is proud to deliver innovative, affordable, and top-quality education in high-demand areas such as sustainability to meet the needs of our evolving workforce."
When the program begins in the Georgia Tech School of Public Policy in August 2019, MSEEM students will study topics such as sustainable energy and voluntary environmental commitments, cost-benefit analysis, utility regulation and policy, Earth systems, economics of environmental policy, big data and policy analytics, climate policy, and environmental management.
They also will learn analytical techniques used to estimate and evaluate sustainability metrics, be able to expertly assess the context of energy and environmental problems, and understand environmental ethics and its implications for sustainability practice.
The program will combine professional instruction from the nationally-ranked
School of Public Policy
with Georgia Tech’s top-notch engineering, business, and planning faculties to educate professionals who can lead organizations toward policies consistent with a sustainable future.
“This unique interdisciplinary program takes an innovative and integrative approach to sustainability that epitomizes the commitment of the School of Public Policy to collaborate across disciplines to educate future policy analysts and leaders and turn ideas into solutions to public problems,” said
Kaye Husbands Fealing , professor and chair of the school.
Faculty will be drawn from across the Georgia Tech campus, including from the School of Public Policy, the Scheller College of Business, the H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, the School of Civil and Environmental Engineering, and the School of City and Regional Planning.
Guest lecturers from Atlanta’s corporate community, government agencies, NGOs and research organizations also will participate — helping connect MSEEM students to the state of the practice and to job opportunities.
MSEEM students also will have access to Georgia Tech’s summer
Program on Sustainable Development and Climate Change in Venice , Italy. The 5-week, 6-credit program features courses in climate policy and sustainable development and provides a multi-disciplinary learning experience that combines classroom lectures, guest speakers and instructional field trips.
“The world’s energy economy is undergoing transformational change, and as the public and private sectors strengthen their commitment to green practices, the need will increase for well-trained policy experts able to design, implement, and manage responses to sustainability issues. This program will provide such leaders,” said
Marilyn A. Brown , Regents’ Professor and Brook Byers Professor of Sustainable Systems in the School of Public Policy.
The MSEEM program is designed to serve a broad range of students interested in sustainability issues. Students can complete the degree on campus or online as a full-time student. Students also have the option to enroll part-time and complete their degree online. The program is designed to serve working professionals and others who want to participate part-time and earn their degree over several years.
In addition to the master’s degree, Georgia Tech is also offering a Certificate in Sustainable Energy and Environmental Management. This 12-credit hour SEEM Certificate can be completed in one or two semesters and can be earned on its own or in combination with the master’s degree.
Applications are being accepted through June 15 for the inaugural class of MSEEM students, who will begin study in August 2019.
A generous philanthropic gift has enabled Georgia Tech to offer five fully funded MSEEM fellowships to the program each year for the first three years of the program.
For more information on these programs, visit
https://spp.gatech.edu/masters/mseem .
Additional Images
Related links
Georgia Tech Alumni’s AI-Based Energy Grid Modeling Platform is Helping Atlanta…
Marilyn Brown Leads Atlanta to Win $2.5 Million American Cities Climate Challen…
Students in Japan Program Solve Real World Problems in Sustainability
Contact
Michael Pearson michael.pearson@iac.gatech.edu
404.894.2290
Email
michael.pearson@iac.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000