Georgia Tech Moves Forward with Plans to Construct New Student Housing
The University System of Georgia Board of Regents recently approved Georgia Tech’s proposal to construct a new student residential facility on campus to accommodate first-year enrollment growth over the next 10 years.
Feb 16, 2023
— Atlanta, GA
The University System of Georgia Board of Regents recently approved Georgia Tech’s proposal to construct a new student residential facility on campus to accommodate first-year enrollment growth over the next 10 years and enable the Institute to undertake improvements to its existing housing inventory.
“This will be Tech’s first new construction since 2005, when 10th and Home opened to accommodate our growing graduate and family student populations,” said Kasey Helton, associate vice president for Campus Services. “We are excited about being able to further accommodate our first-year students and paving the way for important improvements on our aging residential inventory, while maintaining affordability and offering a compelling and supportive residential experience.”
The new facility will be located on the west side of campus along Northside Drive between Eighth and Ninth streets. At an estimated $117,000,000 cost to construct, the nearly 191,000-square-foot residence hall will contain approximately 850 beds, which will aid in the housing of students who are relocated due to renovations on existing residence halls. Resident support spaces will include collaborative learning spaces, community lounges, and group kitchens.
Luoluo Hong, vice president for Student Engagement and Well-Being, said, “The expansion of residential facilities will help Georgia Tech make positive advances in increasing access, enhancing the quality of the co-curricular experience, and cultivating well-being — all earmarks of the Institute’s
strategic plan .”
The new residential facility supports the goals of Georgia Tech’s emerging
Comprehensive Campus Plan . Completion is targeted for Fall 2026. More information will be shared as it becomes available.
Additional Images
Contact
Sara Warner
Interim Senior Director of Communications and Marketing
Student Engagement and Well-Being
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000