Georgia Tech College Programs Rise Even Higher in National Rankings
Engineering rankings delayed as business and computing graduate programs continue climbing in latest U.S. News & World Report.
A view of Tech Tower from Crosland Tower. Photo: Georgia Tech
Apr 09, 2024
Georgia Tech’s Scheller College of Business and the College of Computing have both improved on what have been stellar annual graduate school rankings by U.S. News & World Report.
The news outlet reported Monday that a question about the inclusion of affiliated institutions in bibliometric data has delayed the release of engineering school and medical school rankings. A question about the accrediting body used has also delayed the release of clinical psychology program rankings.
In the meantime, rankings that were released April 9 show Scheller is now in the nation’s top 25, with five of its program areas ranked among the country’s top 10. Scheller has the No. 1-ranked part-time MBA program in Georgia. U.S. News also announced increases in every Georgia Tech computer science discipline ranked by the outlet, and there is continued momentum among programs in the Ivan Allen College of Liberal Arts. See full rankings here:
usnews.com/best-graduate-schools/georgia-institute-of-technology-139755/overall-rankings . It should be noted that this link’s rankings for engineering and several other programs have not been updated. When U.S. News releases the latest rankings for those programs, this article will be modified accordingly.
The following list outlines some of the ranking highlights from U.S. News & World Report’s 2025 edition:
College of Computing
Computer Science, Systems - No. 4 (up from No. 6)
Computer Science, Artificial Intelligence - No. 5 (up from No. 6)
Ivan Allen College of Liberal Arts
Information and Technology Management - No. 2 (up from No. 4)
Environmental Policy and Management - No. 8
Scheller College of Business
Information Systems - No. 5
Business Analytics - No. 5
Program rankings in some disciplines are not published every year, but the College of Sciences programs remain ranked in the top 10% nationally.
Contact
Blair Meeks
Institute Communications
Email
Blair.Meeks@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000