Georgia Tech Community Asked to Participate in Ramblin' Reading Day Book Drive
Donations are open until March 19, and books will be given to Boyd Elementary School students.
The Ramblin' Reading Day book drive runs through March 19, 2021.
Feb 22, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
From now until March 19, members of the Georgia Tech community are encouraged to donate books to the Ramblin’ Reading Day book drive. Buzz Buddies, a new student organization that builds mentorship programs between Georgia Tech students and those in nearby public schools, is partnering with Boyd Elementary School in Atlanta to deliver books for its students and encourage literacy.
The book drive will culminate in Ramblin’ Reading Day, where members of Buzz Buddies will be interacting with Boyd students throughout the day. The event will start with Buzz Buddies greeting Boyd students when they get off the buses. They’ll be waiting with tables of books organized by grade level, and each student will be able to grab a book to take home and keep. Later in the day, Buzz Buddies will visit all 26 classrooms at Boyd virtually to read to the students.
While only those interested in joining Buzz Buddies will be participating in the Ramblin’ Reading Day event, anyone can get involved on their own by donating books to Boyd via this
Amazon wishlist . Requested books range from
Oh, the Places You’ll Go!
to the
Diary of a Wimpy Kid
series.
“It’s our hope that Boyd students will have the physical materials that help promote reading proficiency, are empowered by the ownership of their own book, and are able to envision themselves at Georgia Tech one day,” said Chandler Woods, co-founder and president of Buzz Buddies. “As for Georgia Tech, we hope to encourage students, faculty, and staff to get involved in the education communities around us, as well as recruit members for Buzz Buddies.”
Learn more about Ramblin’ Reading Day and how to get involved
here .
Additional Images
Contact
Grace Wyner
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000