Georgia Tech Admission Delivers Early Action 2 Decisions
More than 21,500 students from outside Georgia who applied to Georgia Tech in Early Action 2 received their admission decisions on Saturday afternoon.
Jan 25, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
More than 21,500 students from outside Georgia who applied to Georgia Tech in Early Action 2 received their admission decisions on Saturday afternoon. As of this year, first-year applicants could select from one of three admission plans: Early Action 1, Early Action 2, and Regular Decision. Early Action 1 was reserved specifically for Georgia students, including Georgia residents attending high school out of state.
The overall admit rate for Early Action 2, which included both international and out-of-state students, was 14% (38% for Georgia students). Admitted students hail from all 50 states, 74 nations, and 1,889 high schools from around the globe. These students join 2,330 Early Action 1 applicants from Georgia who were
admitted in early December .
“A primary focus area in Tech’s new strategic plan is to ‘expand access,’ and our Early Action decisions put us on a solid path toward achieving that goal,” said Rick Clark, director of Undergraduate Admission. “We admitted nearly 800 more students in the Early Action rounds this year versus last year, with increases of over 40% in key demographics, including first-generation, Black, and Hispanic admits.”
This year also saw a record number of applicants; all six of Georgia Tech’s colleges saw an increase in applications.
“Through the
Georgia Tech Scholars Program
and other statewide initiatives, Tech’s popularity has grown dramatically in recent years. This year applications from Georgia residents increased by 22%, and we set a record for the number of Georgia counties represented in both our applicant and admitted pools,” Clark added.
Regular Decision admission announcements will go out in late March.
“At this point, our team is not only focused on reading the more than 17,000 Regular Decision applications we received, as well as re-reading deferred applicant files, but also convincing our newly admitted students to choose Tech from among their other amazing college options,” Clark said.
While the 2021 first-year class continues to take shape, the Spring 2021 transfer class has arrived on campus. This year, Tech saw a 20% increase in spring enrollment. Sixty-three percent of spring transfers are Georgia residents, and 13% of the total class are first-generation college students.
Learn more about potential first-year
admissions decisions
and
transfer pathways .
Additional Images
Contact
Grace Wyner
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000