Georgia Tech Opens Robotics Lab to the World
The nation’s first remote robotics lab, the Robotarium, opens.
The Robotarium opens on August 22, 2017. From left to right: Steve Cross (vice president of research), Magnus Egerstedt, G.P. "Bud" Peterson and Rafael Bras (provost and executive vice president for Academic Affairs)
Aug 23, 2017
— Atlanta, GA
The nation’s first remote robotics lab, and the nearly 100 machines that call it home, is now open thanks to a little help from its friends.
The Robotarium held its grand opening on Tuesday in the Van Leer Building. Appropriately, a scissor-wielding robot (named Snips) cut the ribbon. Later, a researcher from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign skyped into the room to run a live remote experiment.
“It’s time to begin a new era in robotics,” said Magnus Egerstedt, the Julian T. Hightower Chair in Systems and Controls and a professor in the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering.
Egerstedt, who oversees the lab, was joined by President G.P. “Bud” Peterson, other cabinet members and more than a dozen congressional staffers who were on campus to learn more about Georgia Tech research and initiatives.
The Robotarium is a $2.5 million facility funded by the National Science Foundation and Office of Naval Research. It allows researchers around the world to upload their own code, then have Georgia Tech’s rolling and flying swarm robots perform the experiment. Afterwards the researcher is sent data and video.
Egerstedt, executive director of Georgia Tech's Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Machines, dreamed up the lab about two years ago. It’s expensive to build and maintain robots, let alone an entire robotics facility. He wanted more people to have access.
“It irritated me, and it still does, that robotics research is largely a resource competition and not a ‘who has the best ideas’ competition,” he said. “The Robotarium is solving that. If you have a good idea, you should have a platform to try it.”
Hundreds of students visited the lab after the ribbon-cutting ceremony for an open house. The Robotarium team conducted several experiments, including flying quadcopters able to change formation without crashing into each other.
Researchers can upload their programs and run experiments for free by visiting
www.robotarium.org . See photos from the ribbon cutting.
Additional Images
Related links
How the Robotarium was Created
Watch the Robots (Video)
Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Machines
The Wall Street Journal's Front Page Story on the Lab
Contact
Jason Maderer
National Media Relations
maderer@gatech.edu
404-660-2926
Email
maderer@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000