Georgia Congressman Tours Georgia Tech’s Advanced Manufacturing Pilot Facility
Buddy Carter visit focused on scope of innovation to address challenges
Remote video URL
Apr 24, 2024
When U.S. Rep. Earl L. “Buddy” Carter from Georgia’s 1st District visited Atlanta recently, one of his top priorities was meeting with the experts at Georgia Tech’s 20,000-square-foot  Advanced Manufacturing Pilot Facility  (AMPF). Carter was recently named the House Energy and Commerce Committee’s chair of the Environment, Manufacturing, and Critical Materials Subcommittee, a group that concerns itself primarily with contamination of soil, air, noise, and water, as well as emergency environmental response, whether physical or cybersecurity. Carter was recently named the House Energy and Commerce Committee’s chair of the Environment, Manufacturing, and Critical Materials Subcommittee, a group that concerns itself primarily with contamination of soil, air, noise, and water, as well as emergency environmental response, whether physical or cybersecurity. Because AMPF’s focus dovetails with subcommittee interests, the facility was a fitting stop for Carter, who was welcomed for an afternoon tour and series of live demonstrations. Programs within Georgia Tech’s  Enterprise Innovation Institute  — specifically the  Georgia Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing  (Georgia AIM) and  Georgia Manufacturing Extension Partnership  (GaMEP) — were well represented. “Innovation is extremely important,” Carter said during his April 1 visit. “In order to handle some of our problems, we’ve got to have adaptation, mitigation, and innovation. I’ve always said that the greatest innovators, the greatest scientists in the world, are right here in the United States. I’m so proud of Georgia Tech and what they do for our state and for our nation.” Carter’s AMPF visit began with an introduction by Tom Kurfess, executive director of the  Georgia Tech Manufacturing Institute ; Steven Ferguson, principal research scientist and  managing director at Georgia AIM ; research engineer  Kyle Saleeby ; and Donna Ennis, the  Enterprise Innovation Institute ’s director of community engagement and program development, and co-director of Georgia AIM. Ennis provided an overview of Georgia AIM, while Ferguson spoke on the Manufacturing 4.0 Consortium and Kurfess detailed the AMPF origin story, before introducing four live demonstrations. The first of these featured  Chuck Easley , Professor of the Practice in the Scheller College of Business, who elaborated on supply chain issues. Afterward Alan Burl of  EPICS: Enhanced Preparation for Intelligent Cybermanufacturing Systems  and mechanical engineer Melissa Foley led a brief information session on hybrid turbine blade repair. Finally, GaMEP project manager Michael Barker expounded on GaMEP’s cybersecurity services, and Deryk Stoops of  Central Georgia Technical College  detailed the Georgia AIM-sponsored AI robotics training program at the  Georgia Veterans Education Career Transition Resource  (VECTR) Center, which offers training and assistance to those making the transition from military to civilian lif e. The topic of artificial intelligence, in all its subtlety and nuance, was of particular interest to Carter. “AI is the buzz in Washington, D.C.,” he said. “Whether it be healthcare, energy [or] science, we on the Energy and Commerce Committee look at it from a sense [that there’s] a very delicate balance, and we understand the responsibility. But we want to try to benefit from this as much as we can.” He continued: “I heard something today I haven’t heard before, and that is instead of calling it artificial intelligence, we refer to it as ‘augmented intelligence.’ I think that’s a great term, and certainly something I’m going to take back to Washington with me.” Said Ennis, “It was a pleasure to host Rep. Carter for a firsthand look at AMPF, which is uniquely positioned to offer businesses the opportunity to collaborate with Georgia Tech researchers and students and to hear about Georgia AIM.” She added, “At Georgia AIM, we’re committed to making the state a leader in artificial intelligence-assisted manufacturing, and we’re grateful for Congressman Carter’s interest and support of our efforts.”
Additional Media
Contact
Eve Tolpa eve.tolpa@innovate.gatech.edu
Email
eve.tolpa@innovate.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000