Georgia Tech Announces New Title IX Coordinator
Christina “Chris” Griffin is the new Title IX coordinator at Georgia Tech.
After a national search, Chris Griffin was selected as the new Title IX coordinator at Georgia Tech.
Jun 08, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
After a national search, Christina “Chris” Griffin was selected as the new
Title IX
coordinator at the Georgia Institute of Technology. Griffin began her new role on June 1, reporting to J. Burns Newsome, executive director of Institute Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion’s Equity and Compliance Programs.
“Chris brings a wealth of experience in Title IX matters, which will be of great assistance across the Institute's compliance obligations,” Newsome said. “We are extremely happy to have her on board.”
As Title IX coordinator, Griffin is the designated Institute official with primary responsibility for coordinating compliance with Title IX. This includes providing leadership for Title IX activities; consultation, education, and training; and helping to ensure the Institute responds appropriately, effectively, and equitably to Title IX issues. A major area of her responsibility will be the prevention of sexual harassment and discrimination.
Griffin is also responsible for overseeing investigations and resolutions of Title IX claims. She serves as an independent resource for parties to the Title IX investigative process.
Griffin holds a Juris Doctor degree from the University of Virginia. She is a trained mediator registered with the Georgia Office of Dispute Resolution and is certified to mediate cases involving domestic violence.
Prior to joining Tech, Griffin held positions at Kennesaw State University, where she most recently served as senior Equal Employment Opportunity and Title IX investigator within the Office of Institutional Equity. She has also worked as a government and private practice attorney in Virginia and Georgia and is a certified civil rights investigator, mediator, and conflict resolution professional.
Chris Griffin can be reached at:
500 10th Street NW
Atlanta, GA 30332-0620
404.385.5583 chris.griffin@gatech.edu
If you wish to file a report of sexual misconduct with the Institute, you should notify a Responsible Employee, the Title IX Coordinator, or a Deputy Title IX Coordinator. Responsible Employees are defined in the Georgia Board of Regents Sexual Misconduct Policy,  section 6.7.1 .
See the full listing of Deputy Title IX Coordinators at
titleix.gatech.edu/content/title-ix-coordinators .
Additional Images
Contact
Courtney Hill
Communications Manager
Institute Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
courtney.hill@gatech.edu
Email
courtney.hill@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000