Get Tested, Get Rewarded
For those who have already been participating in weekly surveillance testing on campus, thank you for helping to keep our campus community safe. And for those who haven’t, now is the time to start.
Surveillance Testing
Sep 16, 2020
— Atlanta, GA
For those who have already been participating in weekly surveillance testing on campus, thank you for helping to keep our campus community safe. And for those who haven’t, now is the time to start.
Beginning this week, everyone who completes a Covid-19 test weekly at a campus surveillance
testing location
between Sept. 14 and Nov. 12 will be entered into a drawing for a grand prize at the end of the semester. The prize will include a free campus parking permit for the spring semester, donated by Parking and Transportation Services; a private, physically distanced lunch with President Ángel Cabrera; and an Ultimate Game Day Apparel Package donated by Georgia Tech Athletics. All students, faculty, and staff are eligible to win.
To enter, simply get tested at least once a week (for a total of nine weeks) and scan your BuzzCard at the testing site. No other submission is required. The winner will be notified on Nov. 13 and will be required to claim the prize by Nov. 20. Testing more than once a week will not result in additional entries.
Residence Hall Competition
Residence halls also have an opportunity to win a prize for their regular participation in testing. The Residence Hall Association is hosting
Treats for Testing , which will award the winning hall a food truck parked outside their building and free meals for all residents.
Learn more about the program .
Where to Go to Get Tested
View a list of current testing locations and operating hours .
More About Tech’s Surveillance Testing Program
To date, Georgia Tech’s surveillance testing program has processed more than 38,000 samples and identified nearly 580 positive cases. Regular asymptomatic surveillance testing is key to stopping the spread of the coronavirus. View more results from the program at
health.gatech.edu/surveillance-testing-program-results .
Georgia Tech’s testing program was designed by faculty and staff experts. Along the way, they have hosted virtual discussions about the program, the science behind it, and what the current numbers mean.
Learn more about the program
and
view their most recent presentation from Sept. 10 .
Additional Images
Related links
Campus Testing Hours and Locations
RHA Treats for Testing
Surveillance Testing Program Results
About the Surveillance Testing Program
Contact
Sara Warner
Student Life
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000