Get Spooky Safely this Halloween
There are plenty of ways to celebrate while following public health guidelines.
A student holds onto a pumpkin in preparation for the annual School of Physics Pumpkin Drop in 2018
Oct 23, 2020
— Atlanta, GA
As Halloween approaches, people are trying to find ways to get spooky safely. A full moon and an extra hour from Daylight Saving Time will add to what’s already a day filled with candy, costumes, and scares. Wherever and however you’re celebrating, remember to maintain social distancing and other safety precautions.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has published
guidelines
for how to celebrate holidays, including
Halloween , safely.
PianoForte October Virtual Concert: Spooky Themed
Friday, Oct. 31, all day
Online
This year, PianoForte is hosting monthly virtual, themed concerts, and October’s is spooky themed. Anyone is welcome to submit a video of them playing a spooky piece on the piano by Oct. 30. The accepted submissions will be uploaded to PianoForte’s
YouTube page
on Oct. 31.
Science Fiction Virtual Halloween Watch Party
Thursday, Oct. 29, 8 – 10 p.m.
Online
What’s Halloween without movies? Throughout October, the Georgia Tech Library has been hosting virtual science fiction movie watch parties on their Facebook page. The final installment will feature the horror movie
House on Haunted Hill
(1999). Georgia Tech faculty will explain the significance and content of the film before letting watchers comment live.
Atlanta History Center's Virtual Día de los Muertos
Friday, Oct. 30, all day
Online
Each year, the Atlanta History Center partners with the Consul General of Mexico and Institute of Mexican Culture to celebrate Day of the Dead. This year, the event will be held virtually as the History Center shares book recommendations, how-to videos, playlists, and more.
SCPC Presents: Halloweek
Oct. 30 – 31
In-person and online
The Student Center Programs Council will be hosting a few of their own Halloween-themed events, including a
Harry Potter Magicthon
and
Deathly Hallow(een) . Both events will have limited in-person attendance and a virtual option for those wanting to get into the Halloween spirit from their homes.
(Virtual) Halloween Holla 5k
Oct. 31 – Nov. 1
Any 5k course
Each year, the Campus Recreation Center hosts a Halloween Holla 5k, where runners follow Georgia Tech’s Pi Mile Trail, some of them in costume. This year, there will be an optional in-person kickoff on Friday, Oct. 30. However, those wanting to run a different 5k trail or at a different time can do so any time before Nov. 1. Click the link above for more information about the race, including how to register.
H-Con 2020: Pandemic Edition
Saturday, Oct. 31, all day
Online
Each year, the History and Sociology Club puts on H-Con, a history convention and Halloween costume contest. This year, the event will be held virtually, but that won’t stop the annual costume parade. Participants are encouraged to dress up as a historical figure, in particular in a way relating to plagues, masks, or “socially distanced” individuals. Click the link above to learn more about how to submit videos for the parade.
Football vs. Notre Dame
Saturday, Oct. 31, 3:30 p.m.
Bobby Dodd Stadium
The Jackets will be taking on the Notre Dame Fighting Irish on Halloween. Attendees are welcome to come to the game in costume, so long as it’s in line with Bobby Dodd Stadium’s
policies , including wearing a mask at all times unless actively eating or drinking. The game will also be broadcast on ABC (channel 2.1 on the Georgia Tech Cable Network).
Additional Images
Related links
Campus Health Guidelines Overview
Contact
Grace Wyner
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000