Gov. Kemp taps Center for Economic Development Research director for coronavirus task force
Alfie Meek is one of three economists to serve on the task force.
Alfie Meek is an economist and director of the Center for Economic Development Research at Georgia Tech's Enterprise Innovation Institute. (Photo: Jennifer Stalcup)
Mar 22, 2020
— Atlanta, GA
Looking to anticipate and blunt the effects of the COVID-19/coronavirus pandemic on Georgia, Gov. Brian Kemp has convened a coronavirus task force that looks at the economic, health, emergency response and preparedness, and housing implications of the deadly disease.
The 66-member task force is comprised of four subcommittees, including one focused on economic impact. That subcommittee includes Alfie Meek, economist and director of the Enterprise Innovation Institute’s Center for Economic Development Research (CEDR) at Georgia Tech.
“The role of the Economic Impact Subcommittee is to help predict the economic effects on the state of Georgia from COVID19 and make recommendations,” Meek said. “We‘re also being asked to brainstorm policies that might be implemented to help ease the economic pain from this event.”
Meek has more than 25 years of experience in economic/fiscal impact analysis and community-based research. He leads the five-member CEDR staff, which works with its clients — economic developers, community leaders, and industry — to help them understand the opportunities and challenges in fostering local and regional economic development.
Meek is one of three economists selected to serve on the governor’s task force subcommittee. The others are Jeffrey Dorfman, the state fiscal economist who is the subcommittee chairman, and Thomas Cunningham the Metro Atlanta Chamber’s chief economist.
The full subcommittee met for the first time on March 19 in a virtual conference call.
“One clear goal is to represent the many different facets of Georgia’s economy that we think will be economically vulnerable at this time,” Meek said.
In addition to Dorfman, Cunningham, and Meek, the Economic Impact Subcommittee members include:
Allan Adams, State Director UGA Small Business Development Center
Nick Ayers, Managing Partner AFH Capital
Will Bentley, Georgia Agribusiness Council
Donna Bowman, Office of the State Treasurer
Labor Commissioner Mark Butler
Peter Carter, Delta Air Lines Chief Legal Officer (and Chair, Metro Chamber)
Bill Douglas, Athens First Bank & Trust
Georgia State Sen. Frank Ginn
Walter Kemmsies, economic consultant to Georgia Ports Authority
Steve McCoy, Chief Investment Officer, Office of the State Treasurer
Richard McPhail, Chief Financial Officer, Home Depot
Georgia House Rep. Clay Pirkle
Joe W. Rogers, III, Waffle House
Jessica Simmons, Department of Revenue Deputy Commissioner
Jim Sprouse, Executive Director Georgia Hotel and Lodging Association
Will Wade, Georgia Student Finance Commission
Additional Images
Related links
Center for Economic Development Research
Kemp Names Coronavirus Task Force Committees
Contact
Péralte C. Paul
404.316.1210 peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu
Email
peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000