GTENS System Evolves to Include New ‘Inform’ Notifications
The Georgia Tech Emergency Notification System is expanding its ability to keep the campus community informed.
The updated Georgia Tech Emergency Notification System.&nbsp;
Jul 25, 2023
Since its inception, the Georgia Tech Emergency Notification System (GTENS) has primarily been used to convey an imminent threat requiring the campus community to take immediate action. Given Tech’s Midtown location, however, there are occasions when events near campus may not directly affect operations but are worth monitoring. That’s where the new GTENS Inform will come into play.
An expanded GTENS system will be used to inform the campus community that campus officials and authorities are monitoring a nearby situation, but it does not mean that an emergency currently exists or that immediate action is necessary. A separate GTENS message, branded as ‘GTENS Emergency’ to further differentiate these messages from GTENS Inform, will be sent if the situation becomes a threat to campus.
In addition to sending a unified and reassuring message, the system is also intended to reduce the number of inquiries––ensuring that all emergency personnel are available to assist with the situation.
"The introduction of GTENS Inform allows us to communicate about high visibility incidents that may appear concerning but do not actually require immediate action by our community. GTENS Emergency messages are still reserved for imminent threats requiring immediate action,” Will Smith, director of
Emergency Management and Communications , said.
GTENS Inform does not replace Clery Act Safety Alerts, and GTENS will continue to be used to announce changes in normal campus operations.
Current GTENS enrollees will automatically begin receiving GTENS Inform messages through traditional channels, including phone calls, text messages, email, and social media. Parents of Tech students were recently invited to sign up for GTENS, allowing families to stay better informed and connected during emergencies. Parents opting into the system can sign up   here .
Students and employees should ensure they are registered to receive text and voice alerts at passport.gatech.edu.
Additional Images
Contact
Steven Gagliano
- Communications Officer
Institute Communications
Email
steven.gagliano@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000