GTPD Accepting Applications for Spring Citizens Police Academy
Registration is now open for the spring semester session of the Georgia Tech Police Department’s (GTPD) Citizens Police Academy.
Mar 13, 2024
Registration is now open for the spring semester session of the Georgia Tech Police Department’s (GTPD) Citizens Police Academy.
A five-week program designed to educate and inform Georgia Tech students, faculty, and staff about how GTPD operates and the issues they face, the Citizens Police Academy enrolls 20 attendees each session on a first-come, first-served basis.
“This was a unique experience for my cohort and gave us exposure to the inside of policing,” said
Tammie Pierce, emergency management coordinator. “I really enjoyed learning about each division within GTPD and how it functions – especially the hands-on training from the forensics session. I feel more connected to our campus officers now that I know about the work they do on a daily basis to protect the community.”
Sessions provide overviews and firsthand experience in forensics and investigations, digital intelligence, 911 dispatching, firearm training, and more.
Thursday, March 28: Welcome and Introduction to GTPD
Tuesday, April 2: Patrol Division, Jeanne Clery Act
Thursday, April 4: Use of Force and Judgmental Simulator
Tuesday, April 9: Office of Emergency Management and 911 Communications
Thursday, April 11: Law Enforcement Technology and Digital Intelligence
Monday, April 15: Forensics and Investigations
Wednesday, April 17: Special Events and K9 Unit
Friday, April 19: Firearms Training (off-site)
Tuesday, April 23: Community Engagement
Thursday, April 25: Administration and Graduation
All classes (except where noted above) meet from 5:30 to 7:30 p.m. at GTPD headquarters
on the corner of 10th Street and Hemphill Avenue NW .
Click
here
for more information about the program. To secure your spot, submit an application
here .
Related links
Citizens Police Academy
Contact
Gena Snead
Communications Officer
Georgia Tech Police Department
Email
Outreach@police.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000