Halloween Events Around Atlanta
Whether on or off campus, plenty of spooky events are taking place as Halloween draws near.
Oct 25, 2023
As Halloween approaches, get in the spirit of the holiday with these events around the Georgia Tech campus and the Atlanta area.
Six Flags Fright Fest
When: Through Sunday, Oct. 29. Hours vary.
Where: Six Flags Over Georgia
Thrill-seekers, get in the Halloween spirit at Six Flags Over Georgia’s annual event featuring haunted houses, scare zones, nighttime roller coaster rides, and holiday-themed food and drinks.
More information .
Capturing the Spirit of Oakland
When: Oct. 26 – 29 and Oct. 31
Where: Oakland Cemetery, 248 Oakland Ave. SE, Atlanta, GA 30312
An Atlanta autumn tradition, this event is “designed to enlighten rather than frighten.” The tour brings the stories of some of the cemetery’s notable and notorious residents to life. A costumed guide will lead you as you make your way through the Victorian Gardens, and you’re encouraged to wear a costume of your own. The event will also include musical performances, craft beer and cocktails, and an Oakland Cemetery gift shop.
More information .
Surviving the Zombie Apocalypse at Kendeda
When: Friday, Oct. 27, 4 – 7 p.m.
Where: The Kendeda Building for Innovative Sustainable Design
Head to The Kendeda Building to learn how to survive a zombie apocalypse in a living building with its potable water storage, solar power system, composting toilets, and ability to grow food on its rooftop garden. Take a zombie-themed tour, eat, and participate in workshops that will teach you how to can and pickle food and sew and mend clothing.
More information .
Pumpkin Drop
When: Friday, Oct. 27, 4:30 – 5: 30 p.m.
Where: Howey Parking Lot
Hosted by the Society of Physics, the annual Pumpkin Drop carries on the tradition of dropping pumpkins cooled in liquid nitrogen from the Georgia Tech Observatory. Gather to watch the spectacle and arrive early for the Society for Women in Physics bake sale. For the first time, the VIP STEMCOMM class will be on hand with fun Halloween-themed science demonstrations.
More information .
Sips Under the Sea
When: Friday, Oct. 27, and Tuesday, Oct. 31, 7 – 10 p.m.
Where: Georgia Aquarium
Head to the Georgia Aquarium after hours to “face your fears and discover what makes the ocean such a mysterious and unexplored place” at this 21+ event with cocktails, dining options, a live DJ, and access to the aquarium’s main galleries.
More information .
Howl-O-Ween
When: Saturday, Oct. 28, 12:30 – 6:30 p.m.
Where: Urban Tree Cidery, 1465 Howell Mill Road NW, Atlanta, GA 30318
Does your pet have the perfect Halloween costume? Enter the pet costume contest at Urban Tree Cidery’s Howl-O-Ween event with prizes for pups and people. Along with food trucks, there will be dog-friendly charcuterie boards and ice cream.
More information .
Volunteer at Gigi’s Playhouse’s Halloween Party
When: Saturday, Oct. 28, 3 – 5 p.m.
Where: Preston Ridge Community Center, 3655 Preston Ridge Road #100, Alpharetta, GA 30005
Join the Best Buddies organization in volunteering at Gigi’s Playhouse’s Halloween Party. Enjoy free food and candy with fellow volunteers and work with teenagers with Down syndrome.
More information .
Halloween Holla 5K
When: Sunday, Oct. 29, 9 a.m.
Whether you want to walk or run, there’s nothing scary about this race that takes you around campus. The race begins at the Campus Recreation Center and ends includes a free T-shirt, and the chance for prizes for those in costume.
Haunting of Tech Terror Inn
When: Sunday, Oct. 29, 6 – 10 p.m.
Where: Historic Academy of Medicine
The Historic Academy of Medicine transforms into the Tech Terror Inn for “an eerie-sistble, scary, fun-filled night,” with activities including a haunted maze, magic show, murder mystery, escape room, tarot card reading, and more. Come in costume for this event that is free and open to all Georgia Tech students.
More information .
RHA's 2nd Annual Fall Festival
When: Tuesday, Oct. 31, 6 – 10 p.m.
Where: Tech Green
The Residence Hall Association invites you to enjoy cathartic destruction with Pumpkin Paint and Pummel, where you can paint and then destroy pumpkins, venture into a haunted corn maze, win prizes, relax with a petting zoo, and check out Community Council Officer-led booths with fun activities.
More information .
Pumpkin Patches and Corn Mazes
Dates and hours vary by venue.
Whether you’re just getting around to picking out a pumpkin to carve for Halloween, getting a head start on Thanksgiving décor, or looking to navigate through a corn maze, check out some of these pumpkin patches around Atlanta.
·
Randy’s Pumpkin Patch , Lawrenceville
·
Buford Corn Maze , Buford
·
Uncle Shuck’s Corn Maze , Dawsonville
·
Sleepy Hallow Farm , Powder Springs
·
Southern Belle Farm , McDonough
·
Burt’s Farm , Dawsonville
·
Pettit Creek Farms , Cartersville
·
Berry Patch Farms , Woodstock
Additional Images
Related links
Homecoming Events Celebrate Georgia Tech Traditions
Contact
Steven Gagliano
- Institute Communications
Email
Steven.gagliano@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000