Hertz Launches Electric Vehicle Pilot Program for Georgia Tech Employees
Hertz conducting a pilot program with Georgia Tech to rent more electric vehicles to employees for business travel.
Aug 28, 2023
Georgia Tech announces a partnership with Hertz for an electric vehicle pilot program exclusive to Georgia Tech employees.
The 90-day rental program, which runs from Sept.1 to Nov. 30, will support the business travel needs of Institute employees.
The electric vehicle pilot program will provide sustainable transportation options to Georgia Tech that contribute to reducing vehicle emissions and improving air quality, and support Tech’s
greenhouse gas emission reduction goals .
Leaders in the Procurement and Business Services department hope it will provide viable options for employees looking to reduce their carbon footprint.
“The overall goal of this project is to further Georgia Tech’s environmental and sustainability goals by providing our community with an electric vehicle option,” said Ajay Patel, executive director of Procurement and Business Services. “We are excited to collaborate with Hertz on this pilot program, as it allows us to maximize our efforts of becoming a more environmentally friendly campus community.”
The electric vehicles will be available for rental online at
hertz.com/georgia , with daily rates ranging from $40 to $110. Rental options include vehicles such as the Chevy Bolt EUV, Kia Nero, Volkswagen ID4, Hyundai Ionic, various Tesla models, and more.
Electric vehicles included in this program will only be available for rent from the
Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport
and the Hertz car rental facility located at
202 Courtland St. NE in Atlanta . Rentals can, however, be returned to any Hertz location in the metro Atlanta area.
For more information on rental rates, car charging requirements, and more, please visit
HertzLink , choose “University System of Georgia” from the reservation category, and select “Georgia Institute of Technology” from the dropdown menu.
Additional Images
Related links
HertzLink
Greenhouse gas emission reduction goals
Contact
India Maul
Communications Program Manager | Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
india.maul@gatech.edu  | comm.gatech.edu | gatech.edu
Email
india.maul@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000