Homecoming Events Begin This Week
A mindset of having fun safely will prevail this weekend as Georgia Tech Homecoming events begin Friday.
Buzz in a Face Covering
Oct 07, 2020
— Atlanta, GA
As the semester reaches its halfway point, the campus community has adapted to holding events as safely as possible. With Homecoming approaching, it is important to remember that you can get out and enjoy modified campus activities and fun social interactions while following safety guidelines and protocols. Georgia Tech Homecoming events — which will look somewhat different from years past but will be no less spirited — begin Friday.
The Mini 500
will take place Friday, Oct. 16, around the Stamps Recreation Fields at 6:30 p.m. All attendees and participants will have a temperature check and must wear a face covering. Only four teams will race at a time in a time trial fashion. Racers will complete a half lap before sanitizing their trikes and passing them along to the next rider. Every team will complete two laps around the track.
The annual
Freshman Cake Race
will commence Saturday, Oct. 10, at 8 a.m. near Clough Commons. This year, participants will be assigned start times based on their residence hall. It may be the longest Freshman Cake Race in history — spanning six hours in order to accommodate several heats of participants, with a maximum of 15 runners in each heat, all spaced 6 feet apart at the starting line.
More information
is available from the Ramblin’ Reck Club, which hosts the event.
The Wreck Parade
will also take place this weekend, beginning at 9 a.m. Sunday, Oct. 11, in the parking lot of McCamish Pavilion. The annual event will not feature its usual contraptions, but will include classic cars and decorated vehicles that will travel along a designated route around campus. Grab a mask and head outdoors to watch.
The Student Center Programs Council (SCPC) will host the
Homecoming Concert featuring Jason Derulo
Saturday, Oct. 10, at 8 p.m. The event will be
hosted virtually
and will also feature the reveal of finalists for Mr. and Ms. Georgia Tech.
SCPC will also host a
Homecoming Carnival
Tuesday, Oct. 13, at the Instructional Center Lawn and Exhibition Hall. It will also include virtual events. The in-person events begin at 10 a.m. and tickets must be reserved in advance at
https://bit.ly/campustickets .
The Alumni Association will not host its annual reunion weekend activities this year, but is hosting an online contest for the most "Tech'd Out" fans. Prizes include a branded portable, modular outdoor kitchen and dry box; an original painting of the Ramblin' Wreck; and an at-home tailgate experience. Learn more and submit your photo entry at
gtalumni.org/contest .
The week will culminate with Georgia Tech’s football contest against Clemson on Saturday, Oct. 17, at noon. View this season's gameday procedures at
ramblinwreck.com .
Additional Images
Contact
Kristen Bailey
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000