Homecoming Events Begin This Weekend
Homecoming is Oct. 8, and an event-filled week is scheduled to lead up to the game.
The Mini 500 tricycle race is a Homecoming tradition.
Sep 29, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
Homecoming is Oct. 8, and an event-filled week is scheduled to lead up to the game. These traditions are great opportunities to get involved in the culture of campus throughout the week, and it all starts this weekend.
Homecoming Gala
The Homecoming Gala is Friday, Sept. 30, from 7 to 10 p.m. It is a free opportunity to dance the night away with friends. The dress code is formal, so get dressed up and ring in the Homecoming season. Ramblin’ Royalty will be announced at the end of the event.
SCPC Homecoming Competition
Throughout the week, teams will participate in a wide array of events such as an egg toss, “canstruction,” and block by block. There’s an event for everyone, whether it’s playing Mario Kart or racing through an obstacle course. Although teams have already been formed, spectators are always welcome.
Mini 500
The Mini 500 is one of Tech’s oldest traditions and dates back to 1969. Racers compete to finish eight laps around Peters Parking Deck as fast as possible. Many organizations spend months working on their tricycles. It is the perfect opportunity to witness engineering prowess as well as the spirit of the student body. A tailgate starts Friday, Oct. 7, at 4:15 p.m., and students can hang out and enjoy free food while the teams prepare. The race starts at 5:30 p.m.
Freshman Cake Race
The Freshman Cake Race began in 1911 but has seen many changes. What began as a 5K open tryout for the track team has turned into a half- mile race up Freshman Hill. All participants who complete the course get a free cupcake. After the Yellow Jacket Marching Band plays in front of East Campus Housing, students head toward the start line Saturday, Oct. 8, at 6:30 a.m. The winners receive an entire cake and are congratulated by Ramblin’ Royalty at the Homecoming game. Signups close Thursday, Sept. 29, at midnight.
Wreck Parade
Following the Freshman Cake Race, the Wreck Parade begins Saturday, Oct. 8, at 8:30 a.m. This tradition showcases the genius of Georgia Tech engineers like nothing else, as huge contraptions are paraded down Fowler Street along with classic cars similar to the Ramblin’ Wreck. Based off a race from Atlanta to Athens in 1929, this tradition persists to show the school’s love for mechanical prowess.
Additional Images
Contact
Connor White
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000