How to Prepare for Tech's 22nd Annual Earth Day Celebration
There are several ways to get involved before the festival even starts.
The representation of this year's theme was designed by Rita Young.
Mar 11, 2019
— Atlanta, GA
Georgia Tech’s Earth Day Festival will be held on April 19 from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. Every year, it is one of the biggest Earth Day events in the Southeast. The theme for 2019 is “Earth’s Future: It’s In Our Hands.” The event is free and open to the public, and there are several ways that Tech students, faculty, staff, alumni, and retirees can get involved even before the big day.
Office Supplies/Clothing Donation Drive
From now until March 22, new and gently used clothing can be dropped off in donation centers located at Burdell’s in the Student Center, Barnes & Noble in Tech Square, and the Campus Recreation Center.
Campus departments are also encouraged to donate their new or gently used office supplies to the Office Supply Exchange. Departments can email
recycle@gatech.edu
by March 22 to schedule a pick-up or drop-off. Students, faculty, and staff with valid BuzzCards will be able to shop the collection of clothing and office supplies for free at the festival.
Environmental Leadership Awards Nominations
If you know a Georgia Tech student, faculty or staff member, alumnus, or retiree who advocates or works for the cause of protecting the environment, consider nominating them for the 2019 Earth Day Environmental Leadership Awards. Single, group, and self-nominations are welcome and will be open until March 24. The winners will be honored during the Earth Day Festival. More information on eligibility and the nomination process can be found
here .
Spoken Word Contest
The Spoken Word Contest encourages participants to try and capture the spirit of this year’s theme. Three winners will be chosen, with the first-place winner receiving $100, second place $50, and third place $25. All three will also be given the opportunity to perform their pieces live at the festival. Submissions are open until 11:59 p.m. on April 1, and more information on the criteria and contest rules can be found
here .
Artistic Talent Performers
Similar to the Spoken Word Contest, the Earth Day Festival is looking for potential performers of musical, artistic, or similar talents to go on during the festival itself. Applications for family-friendly performances (preferably related to this year's theme) are being accepted until March 22; further requirements and the application form are located
here .
Aside from these events, more than 70 booths and attractions will be at this year’s Earth Day Festival, including eco-friendly giveaways, live music, recycling opportunities, and more. No matter how you want to experience the Earth Day celebration, there will be something for everyone on April 19. To learn more about the festival and how to volunteer or donate, visit Tech’s official Earth Day
website .
Additional Images
Related links
Georgia Tech Earth Day Website
Contact
Grace Wyner
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000