Improving the quality and efficiency of healthcare
Gift supports the Interoperability & Integration Innovation Lab, a virtual and physical laboratory for health information technology.
Tech Square's free trolley service and wide sidewalks make the neighborhood easy to navigate on foot.
Dec 19, 2014
— Atlanta, GA
The Georgia Institute of Technology received a donation from  Leidos , a national security, health and engineering solutions company, to support  The Interoperability & Integration Innovation Lab (I3L) , a virtual and physical laboratory for health information technology.  The $40,000 donation supports the development of a pilot demonstration at I3L to improve the quality and efficiency of healthcare. The pilot demonstration includes collaboration with the Georgia Department of Public Health and University of Georgia Public Health Department. “This gift from Leidos will provide students with the time and resources they need to begin the build-out of a data analytics platform to transparently help self-insured employers optimize the value – foremost patient health outcomes – of the healthcare dollars they expend," said Myung Choi, technical manager at I3L. "We are excited about this opportunity and the early interest by both large and small Georgia-based, self-insured employers.”  The donation will support I3L’s efforts in the Triple Aim Initiative, a focus on three key areas: improving the patient care experience; improving population health; and reducing the per capita cost of health care.  “Georgia Tech has been at the forefront of improving public health through the application of technology,” said Doug Barton, chief technology officer at Leidos Health and member on I3L Industry Advisory Board. “Leidos is pleased to support the pioneering work underway at I3L that reflects a much needed shift in academic research toward healthcare interoperability.” Leidos works with federal and commercial health customers to develop and implement standards-based solutions to ensure interoperability of healthcare information systems, including electronic health records. These solutions support the secure exchange of health information, which can be optimized to improve patient care and reduce costs. Leidos applies domain and technical expertise to deliver health data securely in ways that is transforming healthcare.  The mission of the I3L is to facilitate the future state of health IT toward better health and higher quality healthcare through applied technology. This “living laboratory” provides participants access to a wide array of resources with which to experiment and innovate.
Additional Images
Related links
Interoperability & Integration Innovation Lab
Contact
Laura Diamond  Georgia Tech Media Relations 404-894-6016
Email
laura.diamond@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000