Improvements to Campus Chilled Water System Scheduled for Winter Break
To implement operational resiliency for the entire campus, beginning in mid-December, the chilled water system valves will be replaced, or new ones installed, in a phased approach.
Dec 05, 2023
Georgia Tech’s chilled water system has performed well for decades, providing cool, conditioned air for campus buildings. However, the aged system is experiencing operational issues that, if not addressed, could lead to a potential unplanned outage for the entire campus and significantly affect Institute operations.
To implement operational resiliency for the entire campus, beginning in mid-December, the chilled water system valves will be replaced, or new ones installed, in a phased approach. This planned outage will allow technicians in the future to shut off the valves to isolate problem areas and service sections of the campus chilled water infrastructure with fewer interruptions to the entire system.
“Currently, technicians cannot isolate an active leak in the oldest section of the distribution system, placing the Institute at risk for a much broader chilled water outage,” said Greg Spiro, interim executive director for Infrastructure.
Without an operational chilled water system, campus buildings cannot be cooled, causing discomfort for building occupants, especially in the warm weather months. More importantly, lack of cooling would affect the Institute’s research and academic mission since much of the work conducted and equipment used in laboratories and data storage must be temperature controlled throughout the year.
Teams from Infrastructure and Sustainability and the Office of Emergency Management are working directly with building managers across campus to identify any areas of concern. Each building manager should have previously completed a Continuation of Operations Plan with the Georgia Tech Office of Emergency Management. These plans are critically important to ensure each building has an individual who knows what to do in an unplanned outage.
Building lists and a color-coded map of the phased outage plan (see image) have been shared with building managers. Communication with building managers about the project's progress will be ongoing throughout the improvement period, Dec. 16 – 28.
Buildings in red: Outage planned Dec. 16 – 28.
Buildings in yellow: Outage planned Dec. 16 – 23.
Buildings in purple: Outage planned Dec. 22 – 28.
Buildings in blue: No outage planned for this year. More information will be provided as soon as it is available.
View the building listings with planned outage dates
here .
Related links
Chilled Water Outage Building Listing with Dates
Contact
Cathy Brim
Communications Officer
Institute Communications
Email
cathy.brim@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000