Input Sought for Georgia Tech’s Next Quality Enhancement Plan Topic
Georgia Tech is set to embark on a new Quality Enhancement Plan (QEP) and is seeking input and topic ideas from all faculty, staff, and students.
Georgia Tech is set to embark on a new Quality Enhancement Plan (QEP) development process and is seeking input and topic ideas from all faculty, staff, and students.
[Image credit: Keira Burton]
Jan 05, 2023
— Atlanta, GA
Georgia Tech is set to embark on a new Quality Enhancement Plan (QEP) and is seeking input and topic ideas from all faculty, staff, and students. QEP topic selection is a key part of the Institute’s reaffirmation of accreditation with the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC), scheduled for 2025.
As outlined by SACSCOC, the QEP is a carefully designed course of action that addresses a well-defined topic or issue related to enhancing student learning and student success. Georgia Tech’s next QEP topic will be tied closely to the Transformative Teaching and Learning goals identified in the
Institute’s strategic plan .
“The reaccreditation process ensures academic quality, accountability, and continuous improvement — areas that align closely with our strategic goals and values,” said Steve McLaughlin, provost and executive vice president for Academic Affairs. “The QEP is not only a required part of that process, but it is also an incredible opportunity for us to work together to create new ways to serve our students and our community and continue to realize our strategic plan.”
A QEP topic selection committee was appointed by McLaughlin in October, and is co-chaired by Laurence Jacobs, senior vice provost for Education and Learning, and Steven Girardot, vice provost for Undergraduate Education. The committee will host open town halls to receive input, feedback, and ideas from Georgia Tech faculty, staff, and students.
Town Hall Schedule
Wednesday, Jan. 11
9 – 10 a.m.
Peachtree Room, John Lewis Student Center
Tuesday, Jan. 17
2 – 3 p.m.
Peachtree Room, John Lewis Student Center
“Our transformative teaching and learning strategic goals emerged from more than 5,700 unique perspectives and voices from Georgia Tech students, faculty, staff, and stakeholders who contributed during the visioning phase of the Institute’s strategic plan,” Jacobs said.  “We are eager to hear from our community now about how we can build on those goals in our next QEP and create tangible, new outcomes in the educational experiences of our students.”
The final QEP topic will be shared widely with the Georgia Tech community in Spring 2023. A QEP development and implementation committee will then be formed to draft the new QEP plan for submission to SACSCOC.
“Our past QEPs, which created the Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program, International Plan, and Serve-Learn-Sustain (SLS), have demonstrated the potential of a QEP to create transformative learning experiences inside and outside of the classroom,” Girardot said. “Our next QEP will build on this successful track record of enhancing student success.”
Georgia Tech received a commendation from SACSCOC President Belle S. Wheelan “for the exceptional execution” of its most recent QEP,
Serve-Learn-Sustain (SLS) , in Fall 2021. SLS, an ongoing, campuswide academic initiative working with all six Colleges, offers students opportunities to collaborate with diverse partners on key sustainability challenges. Wheelan praised SLS as a “model of how a QEP can transform an academic culture.”
More information on the QEP topic selection process and how members of the Georgia Tech community can share ideas and feedback can be found at
https://provost.gatech.edu/quality-enhancement-plan .
Additional Images
Contact
Brittany Aiello
Faculty Communications Program Manager
brittany.aiello@gatech.edu
Email
brittany.aiello@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000