Jacobs Appointed Interim Dean of College of Engineering
Laurence J. Jacobs, associate dean for Academic Affairs in the College of Engineering and professor of civil and environmental engineering and mechanical engineering, has been appointed interim dean of the College of Engineering.
Laurence J. Jacobs
Sep 18, 2020
— Atlanta, GA
Laurence J. Jacobs, associate dean for Academic Affairs in the College of Engineering and professor of civil and environmental engineering and mechanical engineering, has been appointed interim dean of the College of Engineering.
Jacobs will officially assume the role on Oct. 1, when the current dean, Steve McLaughlin,
begins his new role as provost and executive vice president for Academic Affairs .
Jacobs has served as associate dean for Academic Affairs since 2007, acting as key administrator of all undergraduate and graduate academic programs in the College. He has developed programs related to innovation in undergraduate education and managed a range of assessment programs. Jacobs also has experience in the role, having served as interim dean of the College in 2017.
“We thank Larry for his continued leadership and selfless service to Georgia Tech and the College of Engineering,” said Rafael Bras, provost and executive vice president for Academic Affairs. “His longstanding academic career as both a scholar and an administrator will serve the Institute and the College well during this transition.”
Jacobs received his Ph.D. in engineering mechanics from Columbia University. Prior to receiving his doctoral degree, he worked for two years in the aerospace industry and one year as a structural engineer. He joined the faculty at Georgia Tech in 1988.
Jacobs will serve until a new dean is named. Incoming Provost Steve McLaughlin will begin the search for a new dean of the College in the next few weeks.
Additional Images
Related links
McLaughlin Named Provost and Executive Vice President for Academic Affairs
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000