Join In On Homecoming Events for the Rest of October
The theme this year is “Buzzing Into Fall,” and, with that, there are events ranging from a scavenger hunt to a banner competition.
Georgia Tech Mini 500
Oct 24, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
The season of Homecoming is upon us. As the weather begins to cool down and the leaves start changing color, many Georgia Tech organizations such as the
Student Center Programs Council (SCPC)
and
Ramblin’ Reck Club
are working tirelessly to make the next two weeks unforgettable.
The theme this year is “Buzzing Into Fall,” and, with that, there are events ranging from a scavenger hunt to a banner competition. For a full listing of events, you can consult this
guidebook .
However, there are a few main staples to look out for this week.
The first major event is the
Homecoming Carnival .
This will be Tuesday, Oct. 26, from noon to 3 p.m. on Tech Green. There are many reasons to come out, whether it be the fall foods of apple cider and caramel apples or the games of human foosball and axe throwing.
The
Mini 500
has been a tradition since 1969 where students use tiny tricycles to race around Peters Parking Deck. With four racers and a pit crew, this event is an intense competition. Although the period to sign up has passed, this is a great event to watch the night before the game on Friday, Oct. 29, at 5:30 p.m.
The
Freshman Cake Race ,
Wreck Parade , and
Homecoming football game
all take place on Saturday, Oct. 30. The
Freshman Cake Race
is a century-old tradition among first years. While this began as a way to recruit for the school track team, it has since become an open race to get first-year students in the Homecoming spirit. The race begins at 6:30 a.m. It is a half mile long, beginning at Sixth and Fowler Streets. All participants get a free cupcake, and the male and female winners get a whole cake as well as halftime congratulations from Mr. and Ms. Georgia Tech.
The last event before the game is the
Wreck Parade ,
which begins at 8 a.m. This event shows off three types of vehicles. Classic cars are over 25 years old and retain the spirit of the Wreck itself. Fixed bodies are built by students and based on the Homecoming theme. Contraptions are completely human-powered with the Homecoming theme in mind. All along Fowler Street, students will be able to watch the vehicles as they drive by.
All of these events culminate with the Homecoming football game against Virginia Tech. The kickoff time will be announced closer to the game.
The
Alumni Association
also hosts a slate of events that share the history and traditions of Georgia Tech and offer opportunities for those who “come home” to connect with each other. Students are welcome to also attend these spirit-focused events.
Learn more and register for events .
Homecoming Event Highlights:
Pie Up the Competition
Monday, Oct. 25
4 p.m.
Midtown II, Exhibition Hall
Homecoming Carnival
Tuesday, Oct. 26
Noon – 3 p.m.
Tech Green
Foosball Frenzy
Wednesday, Oct. 27
11 a.m.
Midtown V, Exhibition Hall
Mock Rock
Wednesday, Oct. 27
7 p.m.
Ferst Center for the Arts
Pomp Displays
Thursday, Oct. 28
Noon – 5 p.m.
Locations across campus
Mini 500
Friday, Oct. 29
5:30 p.m.
Peters Parking Deck
Freshman Cake Race
Saturday, Oct. 30
6:30 a.m.
6th and Fowler Streets
Wreck Parade
Saturday, Oct. 30
8 – 9:30 a.m.
Fowler Street
Football Game
Saturday, Oct. 30
Noon
Bobby Dodd Stadium
Additional Images
Contact
Connor White
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000