Karen Fite to Lead Enterprise Innovation Institute as Interim Vice President
Fite, who is EI²’s associate vice president, will lead the 12-program organization while Georgia Tech conducts a national search for a permanent vice president.
Karen Fite is the Enterprise Innovation Institute's Interim vice president.
Jul 10, 2019
— Atlanta, GA
The Georgia Institute of Technology has named Karen Fite interim vice president of its economic development unit, the Enterprise Innovation Institute (EI 2 ).
Fite, who is EI²’s associate vice president, will lead the 12-program organization while Georgia Tech conducts a national search for a permanent vice president to succeed Chris Downing, who retired in June after 31 years of service.
EI 2 is the nation’s largest and most comprehensive university-based program of business and industry assistance, technology commercialization, and economic development.
Fite, who also is director of EI 2 ’s Business & Industry Services group of programs, has more than 26 years of economic development experience at Tech.
The Business & Industry Services group includes the  Georgia Manufacturing Extension Partnership  (GaMEP), EI 2 ’s largest economic development offering. It also includes:
Safety, Health, and Environmental Services  (SHES)
Atlanta MBDA Centers
Contracting Education Academy
Georgia Tech Procurement Assistance Center  (GTPAC)
Southeastern Trade Adjustment Assistance Center  (SETAAC).
“As director of business and industry services, Karen has successfully provided leadership in critical areas of economic development. We have full confidence that she will continue EI 2 ’s momentum and reach in Georgia and beyond as we conduct the search for a permanent vice president,” said  Chaouki Abdallah , Georgia Tech’s executive vice president for research.
“She brings an enormous wealth of expertise and critical understanding to economic development and how to connect businesses, manufacturers, and communities to Georgia Tech’s vast innovation and technology resources to elevate their competitive position and economic impact.”
With state and federal support, for example, EI 2 ’s 160-member staff operate a statewide network of assistance to Georgia manufacturers through the GaMEP and supports commercialization of Georgia Tech faculty research via its  VentureLab  offering.
A globally recognized model for university-based economic development, EI 2 — through its  Economic Development Lab  program — is tapped across the state, nationally, and internationally to help communities and organization innovate in business incubation and commercialization, strategic planning, and economic sustainability.
Other programs include assisting in the growth and development of technology startups through the  Advanced Technology Development Center  (ATDC), serving minority-owned businesses, and advising companies across the Southeast that have been affected by foreign trade.
Previously, Fite was GaMEP’s state regional network manager and led a team of 10 regional managers in their outreach efforts.
Her earlier experience includes the application of industrial and management engineering, employee involvement, and business principles.
Fite has a master’s degree in business administration from the University of Miami and a bachelor’s in health systems from Georgia Tech.In 2018, she achieved the faculty rank of principal extension professional, the Georgia Tech’s highest professional extension faculty rank.
Additional Images
Contact
Péralte C. Paul
404.316.1210
peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu
Email
peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000