Kaye Husbands Fealing Elected NAPA Fellow; Keynotes AAAS Fellowship Program
The School of Public Policy Chair was chosen among 51 leaders in the field of public administration to have been selected for NAPA's 2019 Class of Academy Fellows.
Kaye Husbands Fealing
Sep 18, 2019
— Atlanta, GA
By Paul DeMerritt, Ivan Allen College Communications
The
National Academy of Public Administration
(NAPA) recently announced that Georgia Institute of Technology
School of Public Policy
Chair
Kaye Husbands Fealing
was among 51 leaders in the field of public administration to be selected for the
2019 Class of Academy Fellows .
Husbands Fealing and the other 2019 Fellows will be inducted during NAPA’s annual  Academy Fall Meeting , which will take place from November 7 to 8 in Arlington, Virginia.
“I am very pleased to welcome our 2019 class of Fellows,” said Academy President and CEO
Terry Gerton . “Our Fellows are nationally recognized for their expertise and contributions to the field of public administration and this year’s incoming class is no exception. They are an outstanding group that will enrich our Fellowship, especially as we unveil the  Grand Challenges in Public Administration  and collaborate across the field to find solutions.”
Husbands Fealing recently gave the keynote address for the  American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) Fellowship Program
on September 12. Drawing on her experience as a AAAS Fellow and Executive Board Member, she encouraged attendees to ensure that passion and courage always drive their work.
In addition to her NAPA and AAAS appointments, Husbands Fealing has received honors and holds positions at a number of policy-focused government agencies, nonprofits, and adademic institutions. She currently serves on the
National Science Foundation’s Committee on Equal Opportunities in Science and Engineering,
the
National Institutes of Health’s National Advisory General Medical Sciences Council , the
National Academies panels on Review of the Small Business Innovation Research and Small Business Technology Transfer Programs at the Department of Energy , the
National Academies panel on Reengineering the Census Bureau’s Annual Economic Surveys , and the
Georgia Intellectual Property Alliance .
She is a board member for the
Center for Organization Research and Design at Arizona State University , and for the
Society for Economic Measurement . At Georgia Tech, she also serves on the
Institute for Data Engineering and Science Council , and the
Intellectual Property Advisory Board.
The School of Public Policy is a unit of Georgia Tech's
Ivan Allen College of Liberal Arts.
Additional Images
Contact
Rebecca Keane
Director of Communications
rebecca.keane@iac.gatech.edu
404.894.1720
Email
rebecca.keane@iac.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000