Kopkowski to Lead Communications at Yale
Renee Kopkowski has announced that she will join Yale University’s Office of Public Affairs and Communications, departing Georgia Tech after serving for four years as vice president of Institute Communications.
Renee Kopkowski. Photo by Christopher Moore
Feb 03, 2023
— Atlanta, GA
Renee Kopkowski has announced that she will join Yale University’s Office of Public Affairs and Communications, departing Georgia Tech after serving for four years as vice president of Institute Communications.
Kopkowski joined Georgia Tech from the communications consultancy firm Strat-igence Inc. in 2019, serving as a member of the President’s Cabinet. She has a long and distinguished history in corporate communications leadership, leading the development of strategic communications programs and campaigns in higher education, pharmaceuticals, food and beverage, and technology.
At Georgia Tech, Kopkowski provides leadership, oversight, and strategic direction for marketing and communications across the Institute. In addition to restructuring Institute Communications, Kopkowski also built stronger relationships and dual-line reporting structures with the communicators in the Colleges, Schools, and units. This has allowed the campuswide communications network to better support a wider breadth of communications focused on academics and research; campus life and culture; and reputation, and, ultimately, helped further the goals of the strategic plan. Kopkowski also led the crisis communications team as part of the Covid-19 Task Force and planning team, helping students, faculty, and staff stay informed throughout the pandemic.
“I am grateful for Renee’s service at the Institute,” said President Ángel Cabrera. “Her counsel to me has been invaluable, and her commitment to elevating communications at Georgia Tech has been inspiring to her team and colleagues.”
Kopkowski joins Yale University in the role of chief communications officer. Her last day at Tech will be March 31.
The search for Georgia Tech’s new vice president of Institute Communications will be chaired by Frank Neville, senior vice president for Strategic Initiatives and chief of staff.
Additional Images
Contact
Michael Hagearty
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000