Labor Day Fun Around Atlanta
Celebrate the end of summer with these Labor Day events around Atlanta.
Georgia Tech playing North Carolina in a 2021 game at Mercedes-Benz Stadium. (Photo: Brett Davis / USATODAY)
Aug 31, 2023
Labor Day signals the end of summer to some, so why not end the season on a high note?
Classes will not meet on Monday, Sept. 4, and many campus services will be limited or not operating — but there’s plenty to do. Here are a few ways to celebrate the long weekend in Atlanta.
Aflac Kickoff Game - Georgia Tech vs. Louisville
When: Friday, Sept. 1, 7:30 p.m.
Where: Mercedes-Benz Stadium
The Yellow Jackets kick off the Coach Brent Key era and the 2023 football season in the Aflac Kickoff Game against ACC foe Louisville at Mercedes-Benz Stadium. The action gets underway at 7:30 p.m. Friday, and Haynes King, a transfer from Texas A&M, will get the start under center for Georgia Tech. The two programs meet on the gridiron for just the third time, with Tech winning each of the previous matchups.
Dragon Con
When: Aug. 31 – Sept. 4, all day
Where: Throughout Atlanta
The annual Dragon Con convention will take place in Atlanta from Aug. 31 through Sept 4. Highlights of the event include the Dragon Con Parade down Peachtree Street at 10 a.m. on Saturday and autograph sessions throughout the weekend at the Atlanta Marriot Marquis. View the full schedule of events  here .
Taste of Soul Atlanta
When: Sept 2 – 3, noon – 9 p.m.
Where: 10 Northside Drive and MLK Jr. Drive Atlanta GA 30314
The Taste of Soul Atlanta Festival is a free two-day event celebrating the cultural impact of soul food with top vendors, live music, art, and more. The festival will be held across from Mercedes-Benz Stadium.from noon to 9 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday. Find more information about the festival  here .
Atlanta Hip Hop Day Festival
Sept. 2 – 3
Historic Fourth Ward Park
The Atlanta Hip Hop Day Festival is dedicated to Atlanta's contribution to hip-hop. The event will  feature entertainment, vendors, and more. The festival coincides with the 50th anniversary of hip-hop being commemorated this year.  Learn more about Atlanta and Georgia Tech’s connections to hip-hop .
Hot Air Balloon Festival at Callaway Gardens
When: Sept. 1 – 3
Where: Pine Mountain, Georgia
A short drive from Atlanta, Callaway Gardens is celebrating 25 years of its hot air balloon show that will light up Robin Lake Beach. The show will take place Sept. 1 – 3 at 8:30 p.m. with fireworks afterward. Throughout the day, guests can also enjoy tethered balloon rides, craft vendors, and a classic car exhibit (Saturday only).
Additional Images
Contact
Steven Gagliano
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000