Laura Carruth Named Associate Vice Provost for Transformative Teaching and Learning
Laura Carruth will join Georgia Tech on Aug. 7 and will be responsible for advancing the Institute’s strategic goal of transformative teaching and learning.
Jul 18, 2023
Laura Carruth
has been named associate vice provost for Transformative Teaching and Learning and will also serve as executive director of Tech’s
Center for Teaching and Learning
(CTL). She will join Georgia Tech on Aug. 7 and be a direct report to
Laurence Jacobs ,
senior vice provost for Education and Learning .
She will be responsible for advancing the Institute’s strategic goal of transformative teaching and learning, overseeing and executing programs that promote and support teaching effectiveness and student success. She will also lead CTL.
“Laura Carruth’s passion for innovative education coupled with her ability to inspire and collaborate with faculty, staff, and students make her an exceptional addition to Georgia Tech. Her visionary leadership aligns perfectly with our motto of Progress and Service,” said Jacobs.
For the past nine years, Carruth has served as senior director of the Center for Excellence in Teaching, Learning, and Online Education at Georgia State University. She has also been an associate professor in Georgia State’s Neuroscience Institute and Department of Biology for the past 14 years.
Carruth said she is excited to join the Georgia Tech community and “to contribute to the innovations in teaching and research that have made the university a model of excellence. Transformative teaching practices have the potential to change the lives of students in and out of the classroom, and they can also make a positive difference to the instructors who adopt and utilize them.”
Carruth earned a Ph.D.
from the University of Colorado Boulder and completed post-doctoral training at the University of California Los Angeles.
“As we look ahead to Dr. Carruth’s arrival, I want to acknowledge and thank
David Lawrence
for serving as the interim director of CTL,” said Jacobs. “I appreciate the hard work that he and the entire CTL team have done, ensuring that our faculty, students, and teaching assistants have been well served during this leadership transition.”
Additional Images
Contact
Office of the Senior Vice Provost for Education and Learning
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000