Leadership Reorganization to Address Student Well-being
he newly created Student Engagement and Well-being unit will include all Student Life and Campus Services departments and is designed to better support student success in line with the Institute’s Strategic Plan.
Oct 22, 2020
— Atlanta, GA
This week, Georgia Tech is announcing a restructuring of Student Life and Campus Services into a singularly focused unit for all non-academic student services. The newly created Student Engagement and Well-being unit will include all Student Life and Campus Services departments and is designed to better support student success in line with the Institute’s Strategic Plan.
With this restructuring, all non-academic student services will now be organized under a new vice president of Student Engagement and Well-being. The role will report directly to the president, with dotted lines to the provost and executive vice president for Academic Affairs (Steven W. McLaughlin) and the executive vice president for Administration and Finance (Kelly Fox).
“Student engagement and well-being are central to student success at Georgia Tech and beyond and are core pillars of our new strategic plan,” President Ángel Cabrera said. “This new organization builds on the breadth of services that are already offered between campus services and student life, will improve coordination, and will leverage synergies to better support our students.”
The vice president of Student Engagement and Well-being will oversee all these services in one unit to allow for unified goals, strategies, and actions across all non-academic student service disciplines. Three associate vice presidents and their teams will report to the new vice president: associate vice president and dean of students; associate vice president of Campus Services; and associate vice president for Student Well-being, which will integrate all aspects of student physical and mental health and well-being. John Stein, current vice president of Student Life and Brandt-Fritz Dean of Students, will remain in the role of dean of students where his passion and interests have served students for the past 14 years. Kasey Helton will also remain in her role as associate vice president of Campus Services.
Fox will lead the search committee for the new vice president of Student Engagement and Well-being. The search will begin later this month and is expected to take four to five months. In the meantime, all units will continue to operate in their existing structure.
Additional Images
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000