Leidos donation to Georgia Institute of Technology to fund pilot healthcare data analytics platform
This donation is Leidos’ third to Tech’s Interoperability & Integration Innovation Lab since 2013.
Doug Barton is chief technology officer at Leidos Health and member of the I3L Industry Advisory Board.
Sep 24, 2015
— Atlanta, GA
Leidos, a leading national security, health, and engineering solutions company, has donated $40,000 to the Georgia Institute of Technology to fund a pilot program in healthcare data analytics. The donation is Leidos’ third to Tech’s Interoperability & Integration Innovation Lab (I3L) since 2013. It will support the development of a pilot data analytics platform in the I3L designed to improve the quality and efficiency of healthcare through data transparency. I3L, a program of Tech’s Enterprise Innovation Institute, is a virtual and physical laboratory for health information technology. “We are so appreciative of this third-year gift and Leidos’ commitment to technology in the healthcare and information technology spaces,” said Steve Rushing, I3L’s senior strategic advisor. “This donation allows us to build out a robust aggregate dataset and better define the information employers want in order to optimize the value of their healthcare expenditures.” The project underscores a statewide effort to ensure a healthier Georgia workforce. I3L is collaborating with the Georgia Department of Public Health, the University of Georgia Public Health Department, and a consortium of employers.   Leidos’ donation will continue to support health informatics students working on the collaborative pilot. In turn, that will support I3L’s efforts in the Triple Aim Initiative and its core three areas: making the patient care experience better, improving population health, and reducing the per capita cost of healthcare. “This gift further advances the notable research and work underway at Georgia Tech,” said Doug Barton, chief technology officer at Leidos Health and member on the I3L Industry Advisory Board. “These efforts reflect an industry imperative for the work we do every day to optimize data, making it useful for population health and to improve operating efficiencies in healthcare.” Leidos works with customers to develop and implement standards-based solutions to ensure interoperability of healthcare information systems, including electronic health records.  These solutions, which include advanced analytics, interoperability solutions, and epidemiological and physical services, help customers improve patient care and reduce healthcare costs.
Additional Images
Related links
Interoperability & Integration Innovation Lab
Leidos
Contact
Jason Maderer National Media Relations 404-385-2966 jason.maderer@comm.gatech.edu
Email
peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000