Looking for Things to Do Over Fall Break?
Fall break is rapidly approaching, and while some students will be heading home for the four-day break, many will be staying on campus.
Oct 05, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
Fall break is rapidly approaching, and while some students will be heading home for the four-day break, many will be staying on campus. Since Georgia Tech is in the epicenter of Midtown Atlanta, there is always something to do just a few miles away, and there are tons of fall-themed events for any student with a free day.
At the top of the list of anyone hoping to enjoy the cooler weather is Piedmont Park. This 189-acre park is full of greenspace where you can find others exercising, walking dogs, or relaxing in a field. It is only a little over a mile from Tech’s campus, so you can get there even without a car. The park also connects to the Atlanta Beltline, a 22-mile loop that allows pedestrians to travel through parts of the city with ease. On top of this, if you are willing to spend some money, the breathtaking Atlanta Botanical Garden is connected to Piedmont Park.
If you want to do a little shopping, Olmsted Linear Park has you covered. Although this is a farther journey than Piedmont Park, the
Festival on Ponce
is one of the best ways to welcome in the fall. There will be over 100 vendors on Saturday and Sunday. It’s a fun way to
support Atlanta’s local businesses, and whether you are looking for art, jewelry, or food, you can find it at the festival. Another event is the
ONE Musicfest , where you can catch some of today’s hottest artists. It takes place in Centennial Olympic Park, an easy walk from campus with some friends. The two-day festival will feature acts including H.E.R., Lil Wayne, and Ty Dolla $ign.
No matter how you decide to spend your break, make sure to spend time outside with friends and family. This is a perfect time to relax and destress before the second half of the semester, and there is no better place to do it than the city you are already in.
Additional Images
Contact
Connor White
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000