Looking for Things to Do Over Winter Break?
As winter break approaches, many students will be heading home after the end of the fall semester. However, some students will be spending those weeks in Atlanta.
Tech Tower Lawn Covered in Snow
Dec 09, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
As winter break approaches, many students will be heading home after the end of the fall semester. However, some students will be spending those weeks in Atlanta. If that’s you, there are myriad things to do around the city to help get into the holiday spirit, from Christmas lights to ice-skating rinks.
One of the most impressive is
Garden Lights, Holiday Nights
at the Atlanta Botanical Garden. Located in Piedmont Park, this is a short walk for any student who wants to spend a night exploring Midtown. These lights are consistently voted as one of the best attractions during the holidays. They enhance the expansive gardens full of luscious plants with thousands of colorful lights. People attending can expect to see everything they love about the garden in a new way while also walking through tunnels of lights. Although tickets start at $25, the cost is well worth it if you’re looking for a festive activity.
Another unique opportunity can be found at the Center for Puppetry Arts. Every year, the center spends months getting ready to put on their live showing of
Rudolph the Red Nosed Reindeer . Most who go once make it an annual tradition, and for good reason. It introduces people to the wonders of the puppets in the museum in a fun new way. This show is also $25.
In Atlantic Station , every hour from 5–9 p.m., lights of the cafes combine with added holiday lights to create holiday ambiance with an animated video on a jumbo-sized screen, along with snow shows. To top it off, the whole area has a soundtrack playing, performed by the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra. Additionally, students can skate on the largest ice-skating rink in the Southeast for $15.
On campus, Georgia Tech will host several basketball games during the break. Women's Basketball hosts Wake Forest on Sunday, Dec. 19, and Boston University on Tuesday, Dec. 21. Men's Basketball hosts Georgia State on Tuesday, Dec. 21, and Alabama A&M on Thursday, Dec. 23. View a full schedule for the
men's
and
women's
teams.
Whatever you decide to explore, you can be sure you will never be bored during the break. This is a great time to go outside and check out the expansive city. It’s also an important time to rest and recharge — take care of yourself and get ready for a successful spring semester.
Additional Images
Contact
Connor White
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000