Maintaining Mental Health at the Midpoint of the Semester
Between schoolwork, extracurriculars, and the ongoing pandemic, students may be feeling additional levels of stress around this point in the semester. Anyone struggling with their mental health is encouraged to take advantage of the on- and off-campus res
Mar 16, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
Between schoolwork, extracurriculars, and the ongoing pandemic, students may be feeling additional levels of stress around this point in the semester. Anyone struggling with their mental health is encouraged to take advantage of the on- and off-campus resources available to them.
Health Initiatives has published a list of their
top 10 tips
for mental health self-care. Their
Well-Being Connect
page also allows people to search for information, resources, and events by topic. Visit the Health and Well-Being
homepage
for a list of upcoming events relating to Health Initiatives, the Counseling Center, and Stamps Health Services.
The Counseling Center is also hosting biweekly Let’s Talk sessions, which consist of informal, confidential, one-on-one consultations with Georgia Tech counselors. Hours are from 4 to 5 p.m. on Mondays and 11 a.m. to noon on Thursdays and will run through the end of April. Learn more about how to sign up
here .
The LGBTQIA Resource Center will continue to hold
virtual events
throughout the summer, including coffeehouses and
Q Chats , a student discussion group series. The
Women’s Resource Center
will also continue to hold virtual, by-appointment meetings with staff members, as well as operate VOICE, which provides confidential services to those affected by sexual harassment, sexual assault, intimate partner violence, and stalking.
The Student Government Association (SGA) released a
comprehensive resource guide
on Black community support. The guide and associated article also highlighted several on- and off-campus
mental health resources .
Employees can take advantage of the
Employee Assistance Program (EAP) , which includes 24-hour, toll-free access to licensed clinical professionals. The program is available to all healthcare benefits-eligible employees and their families.
Several events in the coming weeks will also focus on mental health. March 16 and 24 are designated wellness days, where students and instructors can take a break from classes and assignments. Departments and organizations across campus have events planned throughout the day ranging from virtual painting parties to in-person goat yoga. View the full schedule of events and learn how to register for each one
here . The Mental Health Student Coalition is also hosting GT CARES 4U on Wednesday, March 31, at 6 p.m. The in-person event will consist of students sharing their mental health journeys, including the resources they used to get help. Learn more and register
here .
Campus Mental Health Resources
Center for Assessment, Referral, and Education (CARE)
Tech Ends Suicide Together
Counseling Center
Collegiate Recovery Program
Stamps Psychiatry
Vice President and Dean of Students Office and Student Referral Form
Phone Numbers
Georgia Tech CARE: 404.894.3498
Georgia Tech Counseling Center: 404.894.2575
Georgia Tech Police Department: 404.894.2500
Georgia Crisis and Access Line: 1.800.715.4225
National Suicide Prevention Lifeline: 1.800.273.TALK (8255)
National Hopeline Network: 1-800.784.2433
External Resources
halfofus.com
jedfoundation.org
thetrevorproject.org
socalsunrisemh.com/social-media-and-mental-health
Additional Images
Related links
Well-Being Day Events
Making New Friends, Seeing Old Ones During Covid-19
Contact
Grace Wyner
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000