Master’s Class Act: AT&T and Accenture
AT&T and Accenture, have each announced a $1 million contribution to support Georgia Tech’s new online master’s degree in analytics
Oct 03, 2017
— Atlanta, GA
Two of the biggest brands in digital technology, AT&T and Accenture, have each announced a $1 million contribution to support Georgia Tech’s new
online master’s degree in analytics (OMS Analytics) . The contributions will support growth of the program, which began in August with nearly 300 students and is expected to scale over time.
OMS Analytics features the same rigorous curriculum as the Institute’s top 10-ranked residential program at a quarter of the cost. The online degree is available for less than $10,000. It follows the same model as Georgia Tech’s nationally acclaimed
Online Master of Science in Computer Science (OMS CS) , which currently enrolls more than 6,000 students around the world.
“The field of data analytics is growing very fast,” says Rafael L. Bras, provost and executive vice president of Academic Affairs and K. Harrison Brown Family Chair. “We have many more qualified applicants than our residential program can admit, so this online program will allow Georgia Tech to serve more students and help business and industry meet their need for qualified analytics professionals.”
This is Accenture’s first gift to support Georgia Tech’s online master’s degree programs, and AT&T’s third, following a $2 million contribution in 2013 and another $1.9 million in 2014 for the inaugural OMS CS venture.
“A culture of continuous learning is a key component to student success and the success of companies like AT&T,” says Bill Blase, senior executive vice president - Human Resources, AT&T Inc. “Online courses like this one enable students to learn anywhere, at any time, to gain skills in one of the fastest growing fields in tech today.”
Accenture is new to the online master’s table, but is no less committed to its success.
“Accenture is pleased to sponsor Georgia Tech in delivering this innovative new online master’s degree program,” says Mike Sutcliff (EE 1985, MS MGMT 1987), group chief executive officer, Accenture Digital. “We look forward to working with the students and faculty to create interesting learning experiences based on our advanced analytics work with clients across industries.”
OMS Analytics courses are designed and produced for online delivery by Georgia Tech Professional Education (GTPE) via edX.org. This involves a substantial amount of work by not just faculty, but also instructional designers, videographers, writers, editors, and simulation experts, says Nelson Baker, dean of GTPE.
“The AT&T and Accenture philanthropic contributions help fund development during the start­up phase and ensure the program maintains viability until tuition can cover operational costs.”
Without this support, he adds, the program would lose one of its key advantages — affordability. “The ability to offer Georgia Tech-quality education at such an affordable price is exciting, and to also provide access for individuals who can’t come to campus and help them advance their careers is most gratifying.”
To learn more about OMS Analytics, visit
omsanalytics.gatech.edu .
Additional Images
Contact
Jason Maderer
National Media Relations
maderer@gatech.edu
404-660-2926
Email
maderer@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000