Meet Jeremy Gray, Senior Associate Registrar
Students interact with the Registrar’s Office on multiple occasions during their time at Tech.
Remote video URL
Sep 28, 2023
Jeremy Gray is a senior associate registrar in the Registrar’s Office. The Perry, Georgia, native has a bachelor’s degree in political science from the University of Georgia and a master’s in public administration from Georgia State University. He was an assistant registrar at the University of Georgia before coming to Georgia Tech in 2007.
“Our office supports students from the applicant phase all the way to the alumni phase, when they are still requesting transcripts, new diplomas, degree verification, and anything we can do to help them,” Gray said.
A lot of the support for students is now automated to improve efficiency.
“Students are extremely busy. The last thing that they want to do is trek across campus to Tech Tower to ask us a question,” Gray said. “Over the years, the Registrar’s Office has worked with central OIT and with various vendors to beef up our online presence and create as many self-service options as possible. Students may go through their OSCAR portal or through another secondary website to complete tasks with limited bureaucracy.”
The Registrar’s Office has 38 full-time employees assigned to seven teams: curriculum; registration, records, and customer service; academic services; athletic and degree certification; technology; academic scheduling; and online programs. The chief responsibilities of the office are serving as the Institute’s primary steward for academic records and providing registration and other services related to the student experience. The staff also collaborates with academic units, other central offices, and several academic committees including student regulations, Institute curriculum committees, and the academic senate.
The office is currently working on a couple of projects that will have a significant impact on campus. The first, in collaboration with OIT, is to make additional OSCAR self-service changes that will give an updated look to menu items such as personal information, permits and overload request process, and transfer credit. The plan is to implement them this semester and in Spring 2024.
The office is also partnering with various academic units and other central offices to plan for enrollment growth on campus. “We are looking at it from multiple angles, including registration, transfer credit, degree progression, classroom space, and general services,” said Gray.
At Commencement, the Registrar’s Office assists the president in handing diplomas to graduates. Seeing students walk across the stage is one of the most rewarding parts of Gray’s job. “It's fun to see their excitement, the dancing that some of them do, and the shouting,” he said. “It’s just an all-around happy time.”
Away From Work
When he isn’t working, Gray can be found attending college football games. He has season tickets to see his alma mater and two-time reigning national champions, UGA.
“I will cheer for Tech as long as they’re not playing Georgia,” he said with a smile. “I’m a huge Georgia fan, but I just love all college football. I like the history and tradition that goes along with game day. It’s awesome to see the small college towns come alive on a Saturday in the fall.”
He also spends much of his leisure time perfecting his golf swing. “I am a huge golfer. It’s my passion,” Gray said. “My handicap is about a 9, which is pretty good. But I’d never say that I would like to be a professional golfer because I know I don’t have that ability — but I would love to be a caddy for a professional golfer. I love it that much.”
Gray, who started playing at 13, enjoys the strategy and the tinkering behind the game. “I can’t learn enough about it. So, you will find me on the range, hitting golf balls, or on the putting green trying to figure out how I can sink more putts and lower my scores. That’s my No. 1 hobby.”
His tinkering extends to working on projects around the house, like repairing an old lawn mower that wouldn’t start. “I watched a couple of YouTube videos, went through the process, and realized it was a carburetor issue. I took the lawnmower apart, took the carburetor apart, fixed the float that wasn’t working correctly, and put everything back together. I pulled the starter cord and it worked. I know it may sound simple, but I love a challenge. So, it was a big victory for me.”
Additional Media
Contact
Victor Rogers
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000