Mitigation Measures Continue for On-Campus Life
From improved ventilation, to fast and free testing, to ongoing vaccine clinics, Georgia Tech is continuing to take a multipronged approach to preventing and mitigating the risk of coronavirus as more students, faculty, and staff return to campus.
Campus building cleaning while wearing a face covering
Aug 11, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
From improved ventilation, to fast and free testing, to ongoing vaccine clinics, Georgia Tech is continuing to take a multipronged approach to preventing and mitigating the risk of coronavirus as more students, faculty, and staff return to campus this fall.
Vaccination
The best way to prevent Covid-19 is to get vaccinated — and Georgia Tech is continuing to offer free, convenient Covid-19 vaccines this semester. Clinics will take place at McCamish Pavilion Aug. 16-20, Aug. 23-25, and Aug. 27, from 9 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. Clinics will also take place Tuesday, Aug. 31, at Stamps Health Services, as well as Sept. 7-10 and Sept. 13-17, from 9 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., at Stamps Health Services. Book a vaccination appointment at
mytest.gatech.edu .
Vaccines are highly effective at preventing severe illness from Covid-19. If you are unvaccinated and are exposed to someone with Covid-19, you will be subject to quarantine per current Georgia Department of Public Health guidelines.
To date , Georgia Tech has administered more than 32,000 doses to more than 17,000 individuals.
Testing
Asymptomatic surveillance testing will also continue to be offered during the fall semester for all students, faculty, and staff. For those new to campus or who did not participate previously, this saliva-based testing program takes just a few minutes per test and is available at multiple sites on campus. Georgia Tech faculty who are top researchers in their field created this simple, effective testing program to reduce transmission of Covid-19 in the campus community. The program has been an essential tool in keeping cases down throughout the past year. Everyone on campus, regardless of vaccination status, is invited and encouraged to test weekly.
Learn more about how it works
and
find a testing site today .
No reservations are necessary — simply visit
mytest.gatech.edu
on your smartphone when you arrive at the test site. Results are delivered via email. Make weekly testing part of your routine — pick a day and time, and even go with a friend. (If you experience Covid-19 symptoms,
seek symptomatic testing instead .) Regular testing can help identify potential clusters before they become outbreaks.
Facial Coverings
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recently issued
new interim guidance
recommending the use of masks inside public buildings, even by fully vaccinated individual, as a precaution given the broad circulation of the highly contagious delta variant of the virus.
At Georgia Tech, everyone is encouraged to wear a mask or face covering while inside campus facilities. Vaccines and masks are highly effective at stopping the spread of Covid-19.
PPE
Similar to recent semesters, Infrastructure and Sustainability has supplied Housing with personal protective equipment (PPE) kits to distribute to students living on campus this fall. Each student will get a box of tissues and a kit containing a cloth face covering, hand sanitizer, and stickers. Additional PPE requests for students, faculty, or staff can be made
through this online form .
Ventilation
Teams in Infrastructure and Sustainability have been hard at work since the beginning of the pandemic to help ensure a safe and healthy environment for the campus community. We know that
good ventilation and air circulation
can significantly reduce the risk of transmission in indoor settings. Facilities Management has upgraded air filters across campus to MERV-13 filters and is ensuring that all systems are operating optimally. As an added precaution, outside air ventilation rates have been increased where possible, and ultraviolet lights have been incorporated in air handling units across campus. An expert team of Georgia Tech faculty and students
continue to monitor data
captured from air quality sensors, which have been installed in various classrooms across campus.
Cleaning and Disinfecting
Hand sanitizer stands are stationed at every building entrance as well as in restrooms and classrooms. Disinfectant and wipes will continue to be made available in classrooms and for workspaces. Custodial Services also continues to clean and disinfect classrooms, common areas, and restrooms daily. However, heavily used restrooms located in buildings that operate 24 hours a day (such as Clough Undergraduate Learning Commons) will continue to be cleaned and disinfected four times a day.
Additional Images
Contact
Kristen Bailey
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000