More Startups Join Engage
Eight startups join Engage Ventures, an early-stage venture fund created by Georgia Tech and 10 leading global corporations.
Georgia Tech's Technology Square is home to a growing innovation ecosystem of startup companies, innovation centers from established companies and research from Institute students, faculty and staff.
Mar 01, 2018
— Atlanta, GA
Eight additional technology startups will go through an early-stage venture fund created by Georgia Tech and 10 leading global corporations.
The Engage Ventures growth program differs from other accelerators in that it targets later stage companies and helps them develop and execute go-to-market strategies.
“Bringing top executives from our corporate partners together with founders of high-growth companies to focus on go-to-market has unlocked immense value,” said Thiago Olson, managing director of Engage Ventures. “We’re humbled by the talent pulled together this spring.”
Companies in the spring cohort are pioneering technologies spanning from autonomous flight to artificial intelligence to blockchain, Olson said.
Half of the startups have Georgia Tech connections. Three are current portfolio companies in Georgia Tech’s
Advanced Technology Development Center
(ATDC) and a fourth participated in
CREATE-X , a series of entrepreneurship programs for undergraduate students.
The three-month program brings the startups to Georgia Tech’s Technology Square. Meet some of the companies:
Dev/Con – The cybersecurity company works with media and agencies to detect and prevent advertising fraud. The company is part of the ATDC Signature portfolio.
Homee – The company offers an on-demand, home servicing app that provides instant access to electrical, HVAC, plumbing and other providers.
Intriono – A FinTech marketplace with access to more than 200 financial data feeds that cover 350,000 global securities.
PRYON – This company developed an AI platform with the accuracy and security features necessary for enterprise applications.
Stord – A real-time global warehousing network that connects independent, third-party warehouses via an enterprise software platform to drive inventory efficiency. This company participated in Georgia Tech’s CREATE-X.
ThingTech – An IoT service platform that connect assets, fleets, heavy equipment, sensors, machines and mobile workforces in real time. The company is part of the ATDC Signature portfolio.
Verady – This company combines blockchain and industry thought leadership to bring accounting and audit technology to cryptocurrencies. The company is part of the ATDC Accelerate portfolio.
Engage Ventures is the largest-ever strategic grouping of major corporations in an independent venture firm. The 10 founding companies contributing capital, expertise, time and resources in support of Engage include AT&T, Chick-fil-A, Cox Enterprises, Delta Air Lines, Georgia-Pacific, Georgia Power Foundation Inc., Intercontinental Exchange (ICE), Invesco Ltd., The Home Depot and UPS. Executives from these firms mentor companies receiving financial support from the venture fund. The fund is managed by Tech Square Ventures, which is led by managing partner Blake Patton.
Engage offers programming and other services through a contract with ATDC, which was established at Georgia Tech by Georgia lawmakers in 1980 to launch and build technology companies.
The startups are the second cohort to go through the program. The first group completed the program in the fall.
Additional Images
Related links
Innovation Ecosystem at Georgia Tech
Engage Ventures
Contact
Laura Diamond, laura.diamond@gatech.edu
Thiago Olson, thiago@engage.vc
Email
laura.diamond@ajc.com
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000