New Cohort of Faculty Executive Leadership Academy Announced
Four faculty members have been selected for the second cohort of the Faculty Executive Leadership Academy (FELA) program.
Jan 11, 2024
Four faculty members have been selected for the second cohort of the
Faculty Executive Leadership Academy (FELA)
program, which is designed to identify and develop senior faculty members for leadership. The new cohort includes:
David Ballantyne, Professor and Associate Chair for Academic Programs, School of Physics
Martha Grover, Professor and Associate Chair for Graduate Studies, School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, and ADVANCE Professor in the College of Engineering
Aaron Levine, Professor, School of Public Policy, and Associate Dean for Research and Outreach, Ivan Allen College of Liberal Arts
Han Zhang, Steven A. Denning Professor of Technology and Management, Scheller College of Business
This program will build on the Fellows’ previous leadership experiences by providing access to senior leadership and their decisions; creating opportunities for them to interact with academic leaders from across the nation; offering close, and accessible mentoring with a cohort learning model; and participating in the formulation of project-based solutions and policies related to real problems and ongoing issues. FELA is led by former provost and executive vice president for Academic Affairs Rafael Bras.
“More than ever before, the health and future of higher education depends on good, experienced leaders with a broad understanding of many issues,” said Bras. “FELA is designed as an immersive program to develop that experience and understanding. Georgia Tech is investing in its future by developing the leadership talents of its senior faculty.”
This cohort of FELA Fellows will serve a two-year term beginning in July 2024. During their FELA experience, Fellows will rotate every six months into one of the four Executive Leadership Team offices – the Office of the President, Office of the Provost, Office of the Vice President for Research, and Office of the Vice President for Administration and Finance. In addition to shadowing and project work during these rotations, Fellows will participate in regular cohort meetings with Bras for leadership guest speakers, case studies, and role play activities to further ground their experience.
“Georgia Tech fosters the careers of thousands of the brightest faculty minds in higher education,” said Steve McLaughlin, provost and executive vice president for Academic Affairs. “These four new members of our Faculty Executive Leadership Academy represent those who wish to step forward as future leaders and learn what it takes to support the work of a university on an executive level. We look forward to working alongside them in the coming months.”
Learn more
about the FELA program and members of the first and second cohorts.
Related links
Faculty Executive Leadership Academy
Contact
Rebecca Pope-Ruark
Director of the Office of Faculty Professional Development
Email
rpoperuark3@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000