New Class of Students Holds Firsts for Tech
As the semester comes to its midpoint, Georgia Tech’s Undergraduate Admission team is now able to get a closer look at the incoming 2023 class.
Oct 18, 2023
As the semester comes to its midpoint, Georgia Tech’s
Undergraduate Admission
team is now able to get a closer look at the incoming 2023 class.
The team’s goal was to welcome 3,750 first-year students to Georgia Tech this fall. After initial deposits, summer melt, and final drop/add, the class size is 3,760 — a difference of just 10 students.
Undergraduate Admission is committed to expanding access in accordance with Georgia Tech’s
strategic plan . Since President Ángel Cabrera set that strategic goal in 2020, the first-year class target has grown by around 700 students. This year’s first-year class is 43% women, and the overall undergraduate population is 40% women. Twenty-five percent of this year’s class is Black, Hispanic, or multiracial.
One way Georgia Tech is providing opportunity to more students is through its
transfer pathways , which have grown in recent years. Transfer students are at an all-time high, with 1,400 students or about 27% of new undergraduates in 2023.
“Georgia Tech is committed to expanding access to more students from more backgrounds,” said Rick Clark, assistant vice provost and executive director of Undergraduate Admission. “We believe that talent is distributed, but opportunities are not. This is why we are consistently growing our first-year class, and ensuring we have a diverse set of transfer pathways to Tech.”
For the first time in Tech history, more than 11,000 degree-seeking undergraduates are from the state of Georgia. In addition, more than 1,000 Georgia high school students are enrolled through dual enrollment offerings.
“As a public institution in Georgia, our primary charge is to serve the students and communities in our state,” said Clark, a native Georgian himself. “I’m proud of our economic impact on the state, our research and partnerships that improve the lives of residents, as well as our significant growth in Georgia undergraduate enrollment at the first-year, transfer, and dual-enrollment levels.”
Undergraduate Admission is already in the thick of the next admission cycle. The Early Action 1 deadline, for in-state students, was Oct. 16. Early Action 2, for non-Georgia students, is Nov. 1.
Applying to Georgia Tech will be free during the month of November, leading into the Regular Decision application deadline of Jan. 4, 2024.
Additional Images
Related links
First-Year Admission Information
Transfer Admission Information
Contact
Kristen Bailey
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000