New Georgia Tech Environmental Science Degree Launches
The interdisciplinary Environmental Science (ENVS) degree program, developed by faculty in the Schools of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences and Biological Sciences, is now enrolling students interested in a wide variety of environment-related careers.
Jun 13, 2023
Georgia Tech’s newest interdisciplinary degree program, the
Environmental Science B.S. degree
(ENVS), developed jointly by faculty of the
School of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences
and the
School of Biological Sciences , has launched and is now enrolling students.
The ENVS degree will provide a strong foundation in the basic sciences, requiring core content in mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology, earth sciences, and environmental policy. Flexible electives in upper-level coursework will allow students to customize their program of study to their interest and career goals.
A launch event for the degree program will take place at the Kendeda Building on the afternoon of Friday, August 25, 2023.
“The new degree will prepare students to be future leaders who are well-versed on how the Earth's systems can be influenced by human activity and contribute to human well-being,” says
Greg Huey , professor and chair of the School of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences. “Graduates will be positioned to be leaders in industry, academia, education, and communication to create innovative solutions to the most significant environmental challenges of our time.”
Two faculty members in the School of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences (EAS) and a faculty member in the School of Biological Sciences will serve as inaugural leadership:
Jennifer Glass , associate professor, is program director;
Samantha Wilson , academic professional, is director of Undergraduate Studies; and
Linda Green , senior academic professional in the School of Biological Sciences, is director of Experiential Learning.
The foundational science classes in this new degree will be complemented by courses in Public Policy and City Planning, including
Geographical Information Systems (GIS)
and
Environmental Policy and Politics ,
before opening up and providing students with flexibility in course options to better fit their career paths and interests.
“Past EAS students have been interested in careers related to environmental consulting, environmental law, and continuing their studies in graduate school,” Wilson says. “The variety of environmental career paths was the driver behind allowing students to diversify their options within the degree.”
“This degree will give Georgia Tech students a unique opportunity to customize their environmental science program of study to their interests and career goals in science, policy, public service, non-profit, government, industry, academia, or beyond,” adds Glass. “We are committed to building an academic community in ENVS that values student leadership, diversity, inclusion, equity, accessibility, and belonging.”
Hands-on learning opportunities will include field station experiences and field trip excursions, study abroad programs, and internships, Green says. “This major sustains the Institute’s strategic plan to lead by example, champion innovation, and connect globally — particularly in an area so critical as addressing Earth’s environmental issues.”
Glass added that the Schools of Chemistry, Biological Sciences, and Earth and Atmospheric Sciences are currently
revamping several classes
to meet
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) . Students will advance to be global leaders of environmental solutions that draw upon the U.N. Sustainable Development Goals and incorporate awareness of environmental justice issues.
“We can’t wait for August to celebrate the ENVS launch with our incoming and current students,” Glass says.
More information on the Environment Science (ENVS) degree:
General information:
jennifer.glass@eas.gatech.edu
Curriculum and enrollment:
samantha.wilson@eas.gatech.edu
Co-curricular initiatives:
linda.green@gatech.edu
Learn more: Three new EAS undergraduate degrees
Beginning Summer 2023, prospective and current Georgia Tech students will have three new Bachelor of Science degrees to choose from in the
School of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences . The expanded undergraduate offerings target a wider range of job and research opportunities — from academia to analytics, NASA to NOAA, meteorology to marine science, climate and earth science, to policy, law, consulting, sustainability, and beyond.
The
Board of Regents of the University System of Georgia
has approved two new specific degrees within the School:
Atmospheric and Ocean Sciences
(AOS) and
Solid Earth and Planetary Sciences
(SEP). Regents also approved
Environmental Science
(ENVS) as an interdisciplinary College of Sciences degree between the School of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences and the
School of Biological Sciences . The existing Earth and Atmospheric Sciences B.S. degree will sunset in two years for new students.
Learn more.
Related links
School of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences to Offer Three New Undergraduate Degre…
College of Sciences Courses Spotlight UN Sustainable Development Goals
Undergraduate Student Research Round-up: Summer Across the College of Sciences
Contact
Writer: Renay San Miguel
Communications Officer II/Science Writer
College of Sciences
404-894-5209
Editor: Jess Hunt-Ralston
Email
renay.san@cos.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000