Next Cohort of Emerging Leaders Program Selected
The eighth cohort of Georgia Tech’s Emerging Leaders Program has been selected.
Nov 28, 2023
The eighth cohort of Georgia Tech’s Emerging Leaders Program has been selected. Starting in December 2023 and continuing through Spring 2024, participants will take part in several leadership development activities, including a kick-off retreat, regular workshops and small group work during the Spring, and leadership coaching. This is the first year the program has been open to senior and principal non-tenure track faculty and research faculty.
“On behalf of Institute leadership, we are proud to welcome the next cohort of the Emerging Leaders Program and to have opened the program to a broader representation of individuals looking to further their leadership aspirations,” said Steven W. McLaughlin, provost and executive vice president for Academic Affairs. “This intensive program is an excellent professional investment for these academic and research faculty and we applaud their commitment to their careers and to the Institute.”
The eighth cohort includes the following faculty members:
College of Computing
Betsy DiSalvo , Associate Professor, School of Interactive Computing
College of Design
Maureen Linden ,   Executive Director, Center for Inclusive Design and Innovation
Tarek Rakha ,   Associate Professor, School of Architecture
College of Engineering
Aaron Young , Associate Professor, George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering
John A. Christian , Associate Professor, Daniel Guggenheim School of Aerospace Engineering
Omer Inan , Professor, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Santiago Grijalva , Professor, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Sheng Dai , Associate Professor, School of Civic and Environmental Engineering
Amit Jariwala , Director of Design and Innovation, George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering
Dima Nazzal , Director of Professional Practice, H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering
College of Sciences
John Wise , Professor, School of Physics
Pamela Peralta-Yahya , Associate Professor, School of Chemistry and Biochemistry
Ivan Allen College of Liberal Arts
Allen Hyde , Associate Professor, School of History and Sociology
Office of Undergraduate Education
Amy D’Unger , Interim Director and Associate Director, Honors Program
Georgia Tech Research Institute
Dana Forsthoefel Fitzgerald , Principal Research Engineer, Sensors and Electromagnetic Applications Laboratory
Institute for People and Technology
Clint Zeagler , Principal Research Scientist
The Emerging Leaders Program started in 2016 and is a collaboration between the Office of the Provost, the Office of the Executive Vice President for Research, the Institute for Leadership and Social Impact, and the Office of the Vice Provost for Faculty.
Related links
Learn More About the Emerging Leaders Program
Contact
Amber Slyter, Institute for Leadership and Social Impact
Email
amber.slyter@ilsi.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000