Nie to Join Cybersecurity Startup Aura
Ling-Ling Nie will depart Georgia Tech after serving for three years as general counsel and vice president for Ethics and Compliance.
Jan 13, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
Ling-Ling Nie has announced she will join Aura, a leading provider of proactive all-in-one digital safety solutions for consumers, and depart Georgia Tech after serving for three years as general counsel and vice president for Ethics and Compliance.
Nie joined Georgia Tech from Panasonic Corporation of North America in 2019 and served as a member of the President’s Cabinet. She provided leadership, oversight, and strategic direction in legal affairs, ethics, compliance, affiliated organizations, and risk management, and ensured the Institute maintained a consistently high level of integrity and public trust. Nie restructured the Office of the General Counsel, built Georgia Tech’s Ethics and Compliance program, and launched the Institute-wide Ethics First campaign. Nie also served on the Strategic Plan Steering Committee, L.O.V.E. GT Steering Committee, and the Institute’s Covid-19 Task Force. In 2021, she received Atlanta Business Chronicle’s Outstanding General Counsel Award in the large legal department category.
“I am most grateful for Ling-Ling’s service to Georgia Tech,” said President Ángel Cabrera. “She has been a transformational leader, building a modern, high-performing, and strategic legal, compliance, and risk management operation for the Institute, and offering a clear and steadfast voice as we continue to build and cultivate a strong ethical climate and culture.”
Nie will join Aura as deputy general counsel, chief compliance officer, and head of government affairs. Aura’s mission is to create a safer internet for all with an easy-to-use, all-in-one digital safety platform for consumers. Their proactive safety solutions protect every part of online life.
Nie’s last day at Tech is Friday, Feb. 4. The search for Georgia Tech’s new general counsel and vice president for Ethics and Compliance will be chaired by Frank Neville, senior vice president for Strategic Initiatives and chief of staff. Kathleen Gosden, chief counsel of Student Life and Academic Affairs in Georgia Tech’s Office of the General Counsel, will serve on an interim basis until the role is filled.
Additional Images
Contact
Office of the President
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000