Nominations Sought for Faculty Athletics Representative
As the faculty’s representative on athletic matters, the FAR serves as the liaison between the Institute and the Georgia Tech Athletic Association.
Jan 31, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
The Office of the President is accepting nominations for a Faculty Athletics Representative (FAR) to the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA).
As the faculty’s representative on athletic matters, the FAR serves as the liaison between the Institute and the Athletic Association on issues regarding rules compliance activities, new developments at the NCAA, and activities related to the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC) membership. The NCAA requires that each of its member institutions appoints a FAR who must be a member of the faculty.
The current FAR, Mechanical Engineering Professor Baratunde Cola, will be taking a leave of absence from faculty and university responsibilities in June to lead Carbice, the Georgia Tech spin-off company he founded, through its next phase of growth.
The FAR is a part-time (25%) administrative position appointed for a term of three years. Nominations, including self-nominations, will be accepted from all members of the academic and research faculty and should be directed to Senior Vice President Frank Neville ( frank.neville@gatech.edu ) by Monday, Feb. 28, 2022. Nominations should include a two-page letter of interest and curriculum vitae.
Primary responsibilities of the FAR are:
Representing the Institute as the FAR with the ACC and the NCAA.
Serving as vice chair of the Georgia Tech Athletic Association (GTAA) Board of Trustees and as vice chair of the Alexander-Tharpe Fund Board of Directors.
Serving as senior advisor outside of the athletics department to Tech’s president on matters related to intercollegiate athletics.
Recommending and formulating institutional positions, along with the athletics director, on NCAA legislation and other matters affecting or related to intercollegiate athletics on campus.
Serving as a member of the Institute Admissions Appeals Committee (IAAC) and the GTAA Academic Committee.
Serving as chair of both the Student-Athlete Grievance Committee and the New Transfer Appeals Committee.
Serving as a member of Tech’s NCAA Eligibility Certification Team, primarily responsible for evaluating the processes used.
The role is also detailed in
section 5.3 of the Faculty Handbook . Additional questions may be directed to Cameron Cilano, Senior Counsel for Athletics, at
cameron.cilano@legal.gatech.edu .
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000