North Ave Smart Corridor Project Honored
Georgia Tech serves as the research partner for the City of Atlanta’s North Avenue Smart Corridor Project.
The City of Atlanta held a ribbon cutting ceremony in 2017 to launch the North Avenue Smart Corridor Project.
Photo by Rob Felt.
Nov 16, 2018
— Atlanta, GA
The City of Atlanta’s North Avenue Smart Corridor Project was recognized as an innovative and transformative program during a leading international summit on smart cities.
The Smart City Expo World Congress awarded the project its Mobility Award. Georgia Tech serves as the research partner for this Atlanta initiative.
“This corridor is becoming the most connected one in the state of Georgia, serving as a living lab for active, multi-modal traffic management through technology deployment and data analytics. Smart technology solutions applied here are improving roadway and public safety, mobility and the environment,” according to the  news release announcing the award .
In August 2017, the City of Atlanta  announced an expanded research project with the Institute for the North Avenue project . It involves multiple Smart City technology components designed to: facilitate and promote safety for pedestrian and bicycle traffic; use the latest technology-adaptive traffic signals for a safer, more efficient flow of bus and vehicular traffic in real time conditions; and prioritize fire engines and ambulances traveling along the corridor on emergency response calls.
Georgia Tech has partnered with the City since 2015 to design, implement and study Smart City initiatives.
Georgia Tech leads several initiatives to bring together industry and public agencies to help local governments implement smart development. The strategies developed serve as models that could be implemented across Georgia and the country.
The  Georgia Smart Communities Challenge  provides seed funding and access to a Georgia Tech research team to develop and implement smart design solutions to tackle big challenges such as housing, traffic congestion, sea level rise and shared autonomous vehicles.
Additional Images
Related links
Smart Cities and Inclusive Innovation
Georgia Smart Communities Challenge
Contact
Laura Diamond
Media Relations
404-894-6016
@LauraRDiamond
Email
laura.diamond@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000