Office of Information Technology Represented at 2024 Higher Education Data Warehousing Conference
Staff members from the Office of Information Technology’s Enterprise Application and Data Integration group delivered presentations at the Higher Education Data Warehousing Forum 2024 Conference.
Mar 29, 2024
The
Higher Education Data Warehousing Forum
(HEDW) held its 2024 conference March 17-20 at the University of Illinois in Champaign, Illinois. The HEDW is a network of higher education professionals “dedicated to promoting the sharing of knowledge and best practices regarding knowledge management in colleges and universities, including building data warehouses, developing institutional reporting strategies, and providing decision support.” The organization boasts more than 4,000 members from colleges and universities across the world.  Nine staff members from the Office of Information Technology’s Enterprise Application and Data Integration (EADI) team delivered the following presentations at the conference:  "A Day in the Life of an Azure Data Engineer,” Caleb Tarleton (systems/IT lead architect); "AI Augmentation: Practical Paths to Human Empowerment,” Brent O'Guin (technology strategist and senior architect); "Charting the Future of Data at Georgia Tech: A Blueprint for Modernization and Innovation,” Nick Chaviano (director of Data Services) and Andrew Dietz (director of Platforms and Databases); "Closing the Gap: A Comprehensive Pay Equity Analysis for Faculty and Staff,” Lou Kaba (senior developer, Business Intel); "Data Revolution Unleashed: Empowering Self-service at Scale,” Justin Boone (IT service delivery lead) and Kenji Terawaki (developer II, Business Intel); and “From Legacy to Modern: Revamping Reporting Approaches in Higher Ed,” Bryant McBride (developer II, Business Intel).  "I am incredibly proud of EADI's outstanding contributions to the 2024 HEDW Conference,” said Katie Crawford, EADI executive director. “Their presentations not only showcased our team’s expertise but also underscored our commitment to driving innovation and fostering a culture of data empowerment at Georgia Tech.”  Chaviano served as program chair for this year’s HEDW Conference and has been appointed conference chair for 2025. The 2025 HEDW Conference will be hosted at Georgia Tech.  “Nick’s appointment as 2025 HEDW conference chair is a testament to our leadership in the higher education data community,” Crawford added, “and Georgia Tech being chosen to host next year’s conference further solidifies our position as a leading institution in data-driven innovation and collaboration.”  Learn more about the Higher Education Data Warehousing Forum by visiting
hedw.org/ .
Email
courtney.hill@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000