Pam Buffington Tapped to Lead Foundational Infrastructure & Technology
Pam Buffington was named executive director of Foundational Infrastructure & Technology with the Office of Information Technology at Georgia Tech, effective October 24.
Oct 20, 2023
Pam Buffington was named executive director of Foundational Infrastructure & Technology with the Office of Information Technology (OIT) at Georgia Tech, effective October 24.
Buffington has extensive experience at Georgia Tech and has worked in a variety of roles and responsibilities since 1995, enabling innovative uses of information technologies in both research and academic/instructional capacities. Most recently, she served as director of Research Cyberinfrastructure & Computing – guiding the work of the Partnership for an Advanced Computing Environment – or PACE. PACE is a collaboration between Georgia Tech faculty and OIT with a focus on high performance computing infrastructure with technical support services. Prior to her time leading PACE, Buffington led OIT’s Digital Learning Team as associate director of Academic Technologies and steered external relations activities for Center for 21st Century Universities, or C21U.
“Pam brings a wealth of IT knowledge and leadership into this role, including her ability to bridge academic and research communities at Georgia Tech,” said Daren Hubbard, vice president for Information Technology and chief information officer. “She has been an integral partner across many units at the Institute for years and I am excited for what she will bring in this next step of her journey with OIT.”
Buffington is also a published researcher who most recently co-authored Semi-Automatic Hybrid Software Deployment Workflow in a Research Computing Center.
An official “Double Jacket,” Buffington earned both her undergraduate (BS’95) and Master of Business Administration (MBA ’23) degrees from Georgia Tech.
Additional Images
Email
courtney.hill@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000