Parking and Transportation Services to Join Infrastructure and Sustainability
Effective Aug. 15, the Parking and Transportation Services department will move under the leadership of Infrastructure and Sustainability.
Aug 09, 2023
Effective Aug. 15, the Parking and Transportation Services (PTS) department will move under the leadership of Infrastructure and Sustainability (I&S).
“I’m excited to have this wonderful group join the I&S team,” said Maria Cimilluca, vice president of I&S. “This move is a great fit with the I&S portfolio of services, and PTS will be a strong partner as we work together to implement strategic, sustainable, and resilient transit operations across campus.”
PTS moves from Student Engagement and Well-Being to I&S to better align departments and services with the Institute’s strategic goals in sustainability. Transit is critical to the future of Georgia Tech, which aims to provide more sustainable service offerings to the campus community. The addition of PTS to the I&S portfolio complements and advances several of the Institute’s strategic goals and efforts for which I&S is responsible. These include the Sustainability Next Plan, the Comprehensive Campus Plan, and the Living Campus initiative. In addition, PTS leadership values operational strategies that prioritize sustainability, exceptional service, and responsible fiscal stewardship. This is evident with their transition one year ago to a self-operation model and the recent addition of fuel-efficient, hybrid vehicles to the Stinger bus fleet.
As the PTS team transitions to I&S, they will report temporarily to Jerel Harris, assistant vice president for Environmental Health and Safety, until a permanent reporting structure is established. To help ensure a smooth transition, no changes to PTS’s organizational structure or service offerings will happen until the PTS team is fully integrated and is able to take part in long-term visioning and goal-setting.
Additional Images
Related links
Parking and Transportation Services
Infrastructure and Sustainability
Contact
Rachael Pocklington
Institute Communications
Email
rpocklington@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000