Pride Month at Georgia Tech
Resources for Students and Staff During Pride Month and Beyond
June is recognized as Pride Month. Here in Atlanta, Pride events take place in October, and this year Georgia Tech’s LGBTQIA Resource Center will host events to mark Pride after students and staff return to campus in the fall.
Jun 08, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
For many across the U.S. and around the world, June is Pride Month in celebration of LGBTQIA equality. We get two chances each year to show our support and celebrate Pride at Georgia Tech. Here in Atlanta, Pride events take place in October, and this year Georgia Tech’s
LGBTQIA Resource Center
will host events to mark Pride after students and staff return to campus in the fall.
Regardless of whether you observe Pride in June or October, there are resources available on campus to support LGBTQIA+ students and staff as well as opportunities to become a better ally. Here is a closer look at some of those options.
QT Chats
Flag Building, Suite 140 June 16 and 30, 10 – 11 a.m.
(and continuing biweekly)
In-person biweekly discussions that happen at the Georgia Tech LGBTQIA Resource Center. QT Chats
will center discussion around gender and sexuality and are open to all students.
Pride Alliance / Grad Pride / T+ / Ace Space
The LGBTQIA Resource Center advises
a variety of student organizations or student spaces . The links on
this page
will provide more information about these community-specific groups and how to get involved.
Lavender Graduation
Each April, the Resource Center celebrates LGBTQIA+ undergraduate and graduate students who are completing their degrees. The
Lavender Graduation ceremony
is open to any student who wishes to participate and faculty, staff, and classmates are invited to attend in support.
Campus Health and Well-being Resources
The Georgia Tech Counseling Center provides individual and group counseling for LGBTQIA+ students. Stamps Health Services is also available to assist students with their medical needs.
Students seeking assistance from the Counseling Center or Stamps Health Services should visit
CARE
first for a primary assessment and referral to on- and off-campus mental health and well-being resources.
Student Emergency Fund
LGBTQIA organizations at Georgia Tech have teamed up to launch a relief fund to assist queer and trans students with emergencies that arise in their time at Tech. Donations to the fund are now being accepted and can be contributed on the
LGBTQIA Student Relief Fund website.
Safe Space Training June 22, 12:30 – 4:30 p.m.
These
virtual training sessions
are open to all employees, graduate students, postdocs, and Georgia Tech affiliates who have an interest in learning more about how to practice allyship to the LGBTQIA community.
Faculty and Staff Involvement
The
Pride Employee Resource Group (ERG)
is one of six employee resource groups at Georgia Tech. The Pride ERG hosts professional development and community-building events throughout the year. Any faculty or staff member is welcome to join the Pride ERG. While the group focuses on the concerns of Tech’s LGBTQIA community, allies are welcome to attend and participate in meetings and events.
The Georgia Tech Research Institute also has launched an inclusive community for employees who identify as members or allies of the LGBTQ+ community.
Find more information about AFFRIMED@GTRI here.
Allyship Guidance
The resource center has gathered
a wide variety of tips and guidelines
to help those who would like to become allies in developing more inclusive, welcoming, and supportive networks for LGBTQIA students, staff, and faculty.
Students and staff can always
reach out to the LGBTQIA Resource Center directly , for opportunities to get involved or for support in finding community or care – whether it’s national Pride Month in June, Atlanta’s Pride in October, or any month of the year.
Additional Images
Contact
Steven Norris
Institute Communications
Email
snorris@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000