Promoting the Safety and Welfare of Minors on Campus
A special duty of care and supervision is required to protect Tech’s youngest learners.
Youth Programs
Apr 04, 2023
It is estimated that, on an annual basis, more than 40,000 minors age 17 and under attend programs sponsored by the Institute or conducted on campus. A special duty of care and supervision is required to protect Tech’s youngest learners. To help support a safe and engaging environment for all who participate, volunteer, or work in these youth programs, the University System of Georgia (USG) and Georgia Tech require that all programs serving minors be registered at Tech’s Youth Programs website,
youthprograms.gatech.edu .
Youth programs vary, from internships with high school students, to student organization outreach activities, to summer camps and mentoring/tutoring in local schools. Campus and lab tours, and school field trips to the Tech campus, are generally not considered youth programs.
“The breadth and depth of youth programs at Georgia Tech are extensive,” said Kelly Cross, Institute policy manager in the Office of Ethics and Compliance. “Through conversations with program organizers, internship supervisors, building managers, and human resources representatives, it is clear to me that there is a passion for excellence in youth programming and outreach here.”
According to Youth Programs Compliance, the exciting work occurring at Tech also presents unique risks. To help mitigate these risks, Youth Programs has been actively implementing the
Youth Programs Policy , which mandates program registration, safety protocols, and more to assist everyone involved in working with minors.
Programs are required to register every calendar year, at least 30 days in advance of the program start date. Failure to do so may result in the cancellation of programming. By registering, programs that work with minors will proactively receive information on the resources and policies developed for the protection of the minors and the program staff.
This spring, online information sessions (see schedule in sidebar) will be conducted to clarify policies, process requirements, and how to register a program. Training will focus on key areas of responsibility for organizers of youth programs broadly, and specific sessions will also focus on requirements when minors want to intern or participate in research activities at Tech.
Visit Youth Programs
to learn more and register your program. Questions may be sent directly to Kelly Cross at
kelly.cross@gatech.edu .
Additional Images
Related links
Youth Programs
Contact
Kelly Cross
Institute Policy Manager/Youth Programs Compliance
Office of Ethics and Compliance
Shawn Scott
Youth Programs Compliance
Office of Ethics and Compliance
Meg Bailey
Counsel, Office of the General Counsel
Office of Legal Affairs
Email
kelly.cross@gatech.edu
Additional information
Youth Programs Compliance 101
serves as an introduction to the Youth Programs Policy and the requirements of organizing a youth program. The training will focus on six key areas of responsibility for program organizers.
Thursday, April 6, from 1 to 2 p.m.
Tuesday, April 11, from 11 a.m. to noon
RSVP
to register for Youth Programs Compliance 101 webinars scheduled throughout the spring semester. Additional sessions can be scheduled as needed.
Youth Programs Compliance – Internship Requirements
covers the Youth Programs Policy and the requirements of organizing a youth program through the lens of internships and minors in labs. The training will focus on six key areas of responsibility for program organizers, internship supervisors, and program support coordinators.
Wednesday, April 12, from 9 to 10 a.m.
RSVP
to register for Youth Programs Compliance – Internships Training webinars scheduled throughout the spring semester. Additional sessions can be scheduled as needed. Please reach out to Youth Programs Compliance with any questions.
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000