Raheem Beyah Named ECE Associate Chair for Strategic Initiatives and Innovation
ECE Professor Raheem Beyah has been appointed as the associate chair for Strategic Initiatives and Innovation in the Georgia Tech School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, effective September 1.
Sep 27, 2016
— Atlanta, GA
Raheem Beyah has been appointed as the associate chair for Strategic Initiatives and Innovation in the Georgia Tech School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, effective September 1.
In this new position, Beyah will manage activities associated with the School’s large number of corporate partners and affiliates, support the partnership with the ECE Advisory Board, and will lead strategic initiatives internal and external to the School. He will also work with faculty members to develop and sustain a culture of innovation and entrepreneurship within their groups.
Beyah joined the ECE faculty in 2011, where he holds the Motorola Foundation Professorship. He leads the Communications Assurance and Performance (CAP) Group and is a member of the Communications Systems Center (CSC) and the Institute for Information Security and Privacy (IISP). Prior to returning to Georgia Tech, Beyah was an assistant professor in the Department of Computer Science at Georgia State University, a research faculty member with the CSC, and a consultant with Andersen Consulting’s (now Accenture) Network Solutions Group. A two-time Georgia Tech ECE alumnus, he earned his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in 1999 and 2003, respectively. He currently holds the Motorola Foundation Professorship in ECE.
Beyah’s research interests include network security, network traffic characterization and performance, privacy, and cyber-physical systems security with a focus on critical infrastructure. His group has discovered critical flaws in many power grid devices across the globe, and this work has resulted in the development of security patches for these devices.
Beyah’s work has been highlighted in many news outlets, including
NSF Science 360 Radio ,
NetworkWorld , and
Forbes . He is an NSF CAREER Award recipient, was one of 12 junior faculty members selected for DARPA’s 2010 Computer Science Study Panel, and received the inaugural Department of Computer Science Outstanding Performance Award while at Georgia State University. His work has resulted in 114 refereed or invited publications, and he has served as an associate editor or guest editor for several journals in the field.
Beyah has graduated six Ph.D. students and over 18 M.S. students, and his research group currently consists of five Ph.D. students and two M.S. students.
He is currently the chair of ECE’s Computer Systems and Software (CSS) group, and he is leading the formation of ECE’s new proposed M.S. Cyber Security degree.
Beyah is a member of the Georgia Tech Sloan University Center of Exemplary Mentoring (UCEM) committee and currently serves as director of the Georgia Tech Summer Undergraduate Research Experience (SURE) program. Prior to becoming director of SURE, Beyah regularly served as a graduate student mentor and faculty advisor with the program. He is also a faculty advisor for the Georgia Tech Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation Program and is a regular participant in the Georgia Tech FOCUS Program, an annual graduate student recruitment event that takes place over the Martin Luther King Jr. holiday weekend. Along with two faculty members in the Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering, Beyah co-founded the Academic and Research Leadership Network (ARLN). Supported by 17 engineering deans and the NSF, the mission of ARLN is to increase the representation of underrepresented groups in the academy.
Beyah is a member of the University of Pittsburgh’s School of Information Sciences Board of Visitors and a member of MARTA’s Cyber Security Advisory Board. He has contributed to the Atlanta community through activities with Atlanta Public Schools and is a 2014 graduate of Leadership Atlanta, the city’s most prestigious executive leadership program and a 2011 graduate of Leadership Georgia. He is a member of AAAS and ASEE, a lifetime member of NSBE, and a senior member of ACM and IEEE.
Additional Images
Related links
Raheem Beyah
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Communications Assurance and Performance Group
Institute for Information Security and Privacy
Georgia Tech
Contact
Jackie Nemeth
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
404-894-2906
Email
jackie.nemeth@ece.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000