Registration Open for Fall Citizens Police Academy
Georgia Tech’s Citizens Police Academy is a five-week program designed to educate and inform the Tech community about issues related to law enforcement efforts on campus and how the Georgia Tech Police Department operates.
Police sign at Georgia Tech's Campus Safety Building. (Photo: Rob Felt)
Oct 06, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
Georgia Tech’s Citizens Police Academy is a five-week program designed to educate and inform the Tech community about issues related to law enforcement efforts on campus and how the Georgia Tech Police Department (GTPD) operates. The Academy, which is accepting applications for fall, is open to all Tech faculty, staff, and students.
“If you have questions about the operations of the department, the type of training the officers receive, the day-to-day function of the department, or if you just want to have a better understanding of law enforcement — this academy is for you,” said Georgia Tech Sergeant Jessica Howard, Academy coordinator.
The training, which begins Oct. 21, includes classes on investigations, the Clery Act, K-9, law enforcement technology, firearms, emergency preparedness, and crime prevention. All classes are held from 5:30 to 7:30 p.m. at the Georgia Tech Police Department on Tech’s campus. The program is free, but participants must commit to attend all sessions.
Class size is limited. Applicants must submit an online application by Oct. 18 and undergo a limited background investigation.
Howard believes the Academy helps to develop and foster positive relations between the community and GTPD through education.
“I believe giving people the opportunity to gain insight into how and why a law enforcement agency operates the way it does — from administrative positions to the officers in the field — brings better understanding and, ultimately, long-lasting positive relationships,” Howard said.
For schedule details and to register for the Citizens Police Academy, visit
police.gatech.edu/citizens-police-academy .
Additional Images
Contact
Kristen Bailey
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000