Request for Proposals: Micro Research Grants for Regenerative Built Environments
The Kendeda Building Advisory Board is looking to fund very small research experiments, design exercises, crafting of models or prototypes, or development and analysis of datasets for questions relevant to regenerative built environments.
A student takes water samples from a reed bed at the Kendeda Builiding for Innovative Sustainable Design.
May 04, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
The  Kendeda Building Advisory Board  conceived of this pilot program in 2021. It will provide micro research grants ($50 to $500) to eligible participants to conduct limited, but novel, research experiments, design exercises, crafting of models or prototypes, or development and analysis of datasets. Research relevant to the topic of regenerative built environments is required. If you are thinking, “what is a regenerative built environment?”, then we recommend a review of  www.livingbuilding.gatech.edu . The research must incorporate the campus itself or its operations. We encourage submittals that explore ways in which our campus can continue to innovate, demonstrate, prove, and promote the adoption of best and next practices in regenerative design and operations. In your proposal, define “regenerative” design and/or operations as it pertains to your proposed project. We encourage you to relate the project to one or more of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs,  https://sdgs.un.org/goals ). Proposals are especially sought from staff and students at Georgia Tech that have not traditionally been directly involved in research, though proposals from all members of the Georgia Tech community are welcome.
Grant Size:  Requests for funding are expected to range between $50 and $500
Proposal Due Date:  Email a 2-page proposal by May 31, 2021 to Kamilah Roberts at  kamilah.roberts@sustain.gatech.edu ; subject line of the email should read " [Your name] - Proposal for Micro Research Grant. "
Project Start Date:  June 15, 2021
Eligibility:  Georgia Tech enrolled students and current faculty and staff. Note: you do not need to be a professional researcher! You do need an interesting question and a plan to figure out how to answer it.
Program Contacts:  Shan Arora (Kendeda Building,  shan.arora@gatech.edu ), Michael Chang (BBISS,  chang@gatech.edu ), Kim Cobb (EAS,  kcobb@gatech.edu ), Michael Gamble (ARCH,  michael.gamble@design.gatech.edu ), and Danny Johnson (Atlanta Regional Commission)
Inspiration:  Nobel Laureate Muhammed Yunus and the Grameen Bank, who transformed communities and lives through microcredit - small loans that do not require collateral.
Additional Images
Related links
Learn all the Details: Kendeda Builiding Micro Grant Page
Contact
Kamilah Roberts , Program Support Coordinator, Kendeda Building for Innovative Sustainable Design
Email
kamilah.roberts@sustain.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000