Scheller College Dean Alavi to Step Down June 30
Alavi will continue as a member of the faculty and will be appointed to the Elizabeth D. and Thomas M. Holder Chair in the College.
Maryam Alavi, Dean, Scheller College of Business
Jan 17, 2023
— Atlanta, GA
Maryam Alavi, dean of Georgia Tech’s Ernest Scheller College of Business, has announced that she will step down on June 30. She will continue at Tech as a member of the faculty and will be appointed to the Elizabeth D. and Thomas M. Holder Chair in the College.
“We are incredibly grateful to Dean Alavi for her service as dean to the Scheller College community and to the Institute as a whole,” said Provost Steve McLaughlin. “Her service has ensured Scheller College is a true force of excellence, scholarship, and leadership, and an engaged and diverse community of faculty, staff, and students. We are fortunate to have her continue as a member of the faculty.”
Alavi joined Georgia Tech in 2014. During her tenure as dean, the Scheller College of Business launched and expanded innovative and interdisciplinary curricular and cocurricular programs and degree offerings and achieved strong positions in national and global rankings. The College is regularly recognized as a top 10 business school among public institutions by
U.S. News & World Report, Bloomberg Businessweek,
and
The Financial Times.
Under her leadership, the College has achieved high marks in student academic success, career placement, and faculty excellence and research. She has also instituted key initiatives focusing on diversity, equity, inclusion, and staff engagement. And Alavi has increased philanthropic support for student scholarships and fellowships, including those designated for women and underrepresented minorities, along with support for faculty and staff. Additionally, she obtained the named gift for the College’s newest building, Scheller Tower, in Technology Square.
“Serving as dean of Scheller College has been an honor and privilege,” said Alavi. “Working with the faculty, staff, and students of the College — as well as Georgia Tech leadership, my fellow deans, and colleagues across Georgia Tech — has been a true high point of my career. I look forward to continuing to contribute to the ongoing success of the College and the Institute.”
The Scheller College of Business will remain under Dean Alavi’s leadership while a search commences, effectively immediately. Details on the search will be announced soon.
By: Susie Ivy
Additional Images
Contact
Office of the Provost
Email
provostsoffice@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000