SDG Week Highlights Sustainable Development Goals
The campus community is invited to participate in a variety of events that increase awareness of and encourage actions that advance the 17 United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.
Mar 01, 2023
Sustainable Development Goals Action and Awareness Week 2023
is March 6 – 10. The campus community is invited to participate in a variety of events that increase awareness of and encourage actions that advance the
17 United Nations Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs).
The SDGs were adopted by the UN General Assembly in 2015 as part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. They address the world’s most monumental challenges, including poverty, inequality, climate change, environmental degradation, and peace and justice. Some of the objectives are improved industry, innovation, and infrastructure; affordable and clean energy; and sustainable cities and communities. The SDGs appear by name in the
Institute’s strategic plan
as long-term goals that should guide teaching, research, and operations.
SDG Action and Awareness Week 2023 will focus primarily on SDG13: Climate Action and intersecting SDGs. Georgia Tech strives to be a leader in climate action across the Institute in operations, education, research, and economic development, and the development of a comprehensive Climate Action Plan is underway. President Ángel Cabrera encourages the Tech community to participate in virtual and in-person climate action events throughout the week.
On Thursday, March 9, at 8:30 a.m., Cabrera will convene a panel of faculty to discuss climate action. Joining him will be: Marilyn Brown, Regents’ Professor and the Brook Byers Professor of Sustainable Systems in the School of Public Policy; Andrea Calmon, assistant professor in the Scheller College of Business and faculty fellow in the Brook Byers Institute for Sustainable Systems; Tim Liewen, Regents’ Professor, David S. Lewis Chair, and executive director of the Strategic Energy Institute; and Brian Stone, professor in the School of City and Regional Planning and director of the Urban Climate Lab.
The panel is a hybrid event, with remote or in-person participation (at the Scholars Event Network Theater in Price Gilbert Library).
RSVP here .
Other events during the week include a Green Cleaning DIY Workshop through the Office of Sustainability, a Social Impact Careers Alumni Panel through the Alumni Association, a Community Market through Auxiliary Services, a session on How to Afford Study Abroad and SDG Interactive Art Hours through the Office of International Education, a Seminar on Race and Gender through the Black Feminist Think Tank and the School of History and Sociology, two micro-workshops on aligning course objectives with the SDGs through the Center for Teaching and Learning and Serve-Learn-Sustain, a Corporate Carbon Accounting panel through Scheller College of Business, an information session and ice cream social through the EcoCar Vertically Integrated Project team, and a Climate Action Plan Stakeholder Engagement Session through the Office of Sustainability.
View a listing of the week’s events for details and registration .
SDG Action and Awareness Week is part of a larger global effort through the University Global Coalition (UGC), which Cabrera chairs and helped found. The UGC is comprised of higher education leaders from around the world who work to advance the SDGs through education, research, service, and campus operations.
SDG Action and Awareness Week is an annual event occurring in early March. To collaborate next year, contact
Drew Cutright , Office of Strategic Consulting.
Related links
Georgia Tech Launches Climate Action Planning Process
From Idea to Action: How UN Sustainable Development Goals Come to Life in IAC
Aligning Tech’s Education Abroad Programs with United Nations SDGs
Sustainability Next
Brook Byers Institute for Sustainable Systems
Strategic Energy Institute
Urban Climate Lab
Climate and Energy Policy Laboratory
United Nations Greater Atlanta Regional Centre of Expertise
Reports From the Future Symposium Wrapup
Striving to Power the World Sustainably: A Spotlight on Bo Quick (IE ’93)
Contact
Victor Rogers
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000