Search Begins for Inaugural Assistant Vice Provost for the Arts
Georgia Tech is looking for a new leader to champion arts and education.
Oct 05, 2023
Georgia Tech is looking for a new leader to champion arts education and research.
Provost Steve McLaughlin has convened a search committee charged with selecting the inaugural assistant vice provost for the Arts (AVP-A). This new position will help advance Tech’s strategic goal of more deeply integrating the arts into education and research.
This position is open to current full-time tenure-track and nontenure- track faculty at Georgia Tech. Leslie Sharp, dean of Libraries, will serve as chair of the search committee.
Reporting to Senior Vice Provost for Education and Learning Laurence Jacobs, the position will sit at the intersection of art and technology, offering students and faculty a new opportunity to innovate.
“This new role is so exciting because it will help Georgia Tech develop new and reimagined curricular experiences that nurture different ways of thinking, understanding, and problem-solving,” said Jacobs. “Weaving arts and STEM disciplines together creates a more comprehensive and interdisciplinary learning environment, which benefits our students and society as a whole.”
Emphasizing the curricular components of the arts could ultimately create academic majors, minors, or certificates that would distinguish Georgia Tech students from competitive institutions, Jacobs added. He also noted that students with such qualifications are well placed to make a sizable impact on the state’s already exploding arts and production scene.
According to the Georgia Council for the Arts, the creative industries generate a $62.5 billion economic impact in Georgia. That includes 200,000 employees who earn a combined salary of $12.1 billion. Georgia Tech wants to position itself as an arts-in-technology trailblazer that could fuel an even more significant economic boon for the state.
Among other responsibilities, the AVP-A will:
Liaise with College deans, School chairs, and leadership as well as faculty (e.g., tenure-track, lecturers, research and academic professionals, librarians, and archivists) to design and lead the implementation of innovative programs that develop and incorporate the arts.
Contribute to the Institute’s Arts@Tech and Arts Square strategic planning initiative.
Facilitate student engagement in arts-based curricular and cocurricular learning experiences, encouraging creative expression and critical thinking across disciplines.
Collaborate with the associate vice president for Arts, Belonging, and Community in the division of Student Engagement and Well-Being to ensure alignment between curricular and cocurricular efforts and to integrate performing, visual, and all other forms of art into learning, service, and scholarship.
Candidates should log in to OneUSG Connect ( https://oneusgconnect.usg.edu ), click the Recruiting Self-Service tile, click the Apply for Jobs tile, and search for job ID 264210. Candidates should submit a CV, cover letter, and list of three professional references by Nov. 1.
For more information, visit
https://provost.gatech.edu/assistant-vice-provost-arts-search , or contact Susan Gilstrap ( susan.gilstrap@gatech.edu ).
Additional Images
Contact
Susan Gilstrap
susan.gilstrap@gatech.edu
Email
susan.gilstrap@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000