Searches Begin for Enterprise Innovation Institute, Corporate Engagement
Chaouki T. Abdallah, executive vice president for Research, has convened two separate search committees tasked with selecting the new vice president for the Enterprise Innovation Institute and the associate vice president for Corporate Engagement.
Jun 01, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
Chaouki T. Abdallah, executive vice president for Research, has convened two search committees to select the new vice president for the Enterprise Innovation Institute (EI 2 ) and the associate vice president for Corporate Engagement (AVP-CE).
“These two roles and organizations are critical pieces of Georgia Tech’s strategy to become a leading global engine of innovation, entrepreneurship, and opportunity,” Abdallah said. “I’d like to thank our search chairs and committees, as well as the stakeholders across the Institute who have dedicated their time and energy to building strong candidate pools for these positions.”
The two searches will run concurrently and will be supported by search firm Russell Reynolds Associates. The search for the new vice president of EI 2
will be chaired by Devesh Ranjan, interim vice president for Interdisciplinary Research and professor in the George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering. The search for the AVP-CE will be co-chaired by Tim Lieuwen, Regents Professor, David S. Lewis Jr. Chair in the Daniel Guggenheim School of Aerospace Engineering, and executive director of the Strategic Energy Institute; and Vivek Sarkar, chair of the School of Computer Science and the Stephen Fleming Chair for Telecommunications in the College of Computing.
David Bridges will serve as the interim vice president for EI 2
until the search is finalized. The AVP-CE is a new role, created as part of Georgia Tech’s reimagined corporate relations structure. In the role, the AVP-CE will oversee Tech’s new integrated model of corporate relations and industry collaborations designed to help the Institute leverage critical partnerships and develop new relationships with industry.
As part of stakeholder engagement, Russell Reynolds Associates will conduct meetings for members of the EI 2
community, as well as corporate relations and industry research staff, to learn about the search processes and timelines and provide feedback on the characteristics of ideal candidates for the respective searches.
Search details, including committee rosters and timelines, and ongoing updates can be found at
research.gatech.edu/vp-ei2-search
and
research.gatech.edu/associate-vp-corporate-engagement-search .
Additional Images
Contact
Susie Ivy , Director
Organizational, Academic, and Research Communications
Email
susie.ivy@comm.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000