Self-operated Solution for Dining Services
Georgia Tech Campus Services has announced a strategic move from contracted dining to a self-operated solution.
Jan 12, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
Georgia Tech Campus Services has announced a strategic move from contracted dining to a self-operated solution. The new dining operation, called Tech Dining, will begin July 1, 2021. The decision to move from outsourced dining to an in-house operation directly aligns with Georgia Tech’s new Strategic Plan, prioritizing the student experience while striving for dining excellence. Current dining operations will transition over the summer, with new meal plans and operational improvements in place at the beginning of the Fall 2021 semester. The new Tech Dining operation plans to focus on enhanced residential and retail dining offerings, relying on student feedback to continually improve the program.
This strategic decision allows Georgia Tech to refocus its priorities and further define its vision for on-campus dining where our dining environments offer cuisine, atmosphere and service that enhances and supports our commitment to student engagement and well-being. To align the program with campus stakeholder demand, students, faculty, and staff are being asked to participate in a  short survey  that will be used to plan the future of Tech Dining and name many of its new dining locations. Please take ten minutes to complete  this survey  before Sunday, Jan. 24.
Over the next year, Tech Dining will prioritize healthier foods, more diversified offerings, sustainability initiatives, and high-quality ingredients to increase campus satisfaction and meal plan demand. Beginning in Fall 2021, meal plans will move to all-you-care-to-eat in all three traditional dining halls, including West Village, while avoiding a price increase for the first time in decades. Dining will also look to partner with local restaurants to bring popular cuisines to the heart of the Georgia Tech campus.
Current dining employees will have an opportunity to continue working at Georgia Tech, and additional information will be available soon. More information about Tech Dining and its proposed improvements will be communicated over the coming months. For immediate questions, please contact  ryan.greene@gatech.edu .
Additional Images
Contact
Ryan Greene ryan.greene@gatech.edu
Email
ryan.greene@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000