SGA Collects Syllabuses for New Database
The Student Government Association (SGA) is starting a new service beginning this year to provide current students with syllabuses from past classes to help aid in the process of registration.
Oct 07, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
The Student Government Association (SGA) is starting a new service beginning this year to provide current students with syllabuses from past classes to help aid in the process of registration. It was started to remove some of the confusion that inevitably surrounds registering for classes.
“We started working on this a while ago when we realized signing up for classes, we don't know what we're signing up for,” said Megan Dass, the SGA joint vice president of IT. The class description in the registration system cannot give the full scope of a class, and some students may want more detail, such as how many tests there are or how the grades are distributed. These factors can help  students when planning their workload and scheduling, which is why SGA began developing the project months ago. They have been working to create something they would want to use themselves.
The idea of a service created by students that supports other fellow students is at the core of the project. It is a way to help build a sense of togetherness among the Georgia Tech community, as this database will be completely based off student contributions. “When you give to the repository, it helps the project as a whole,” Dass said.
SGA is now asking students to submit their syllabuses to be included in the repository. Submitting a syllabus is easy — simply fill out
this form , which asks a few questions and should only take a few minutes to complete. Submissions will be accepted until Tuesday, Oct. 12. On Oct. 20, the syllabus repository will be made available to all students in time for spring registration. This  project will continue into future semesters, becoming more helpful as time goes on and as more students submit their syllabuses.
Additional Images
Contact
Connor White
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000