Shannon to Lead University of North Georgia, Hubbard in Interim Leadership Role for Administration and Finance at Georgia Tech
The Board of Regents of the University System of Georgia (USG) voted to name Mike Shannon, interim executive vice president for Administration and Finance (A&F), president of the University of North Georgia (UNG).
Mike Shannon (left) and Daren Hubbard (right)
Jun 01, 2023
— Atlanta, GA
The Board of Regents of the University System of Georgia (USG)
voted earlier today
to name Mike Shannon, interim executive vice president for Administration and Finance (A&F), president of the University of North Georgia (UNG). Shannon will start his new role on July 1.
“I could not be prouder of Mike for this appointment, which is a recognition of his extraordinary leadership contributions to Georgia Tech,” said President Ángel Cabrera. “I am certain he will have a transformative impact at UNG, and I look forward to working with him, as a colleague and fellow Georgia Tech alum, to continue to strengthen public higher education in our state.”
Shannon has
served in various leadership roles at Tech over the years, and most recently led the initiatives underway in A&F to improve how administrative services are delivered across the Institute. This includes Administrative Excellence and the associated launch of the Administrative Services Center, the Budget Reform initiative, the HR Transformation project, Data Excellence, the Institute’s Sustainability Plan, and the Comprehensive Campus Plan.
Prior to his role in A&F, Shannon led the development and rollout of Georgia Tech’s innovative Covid-19 surveillance testing program and CLIA testing laboratory, which allowed for the collection, processing, and data management of thousands of samples daily on campus and in the Georgia State Capitol during two legislative sessions.
As a member of the Institute’s executive leadership team and a retired Army officer, Shannon also served as the executive sponsor for resources that support Georgia Tech’s mission of progress and service and the thousands of Yellow Jackets and their family members who have proudly served or are currently serving in the United States military.
As part of the A&F leadership transition plan, Cabrera has appointed
Daren Hubbard, vice president for Information Technology and chief information officer,
as the new interim executive vice president for A&F until a permanent replacement is announced. Hubbard will begin his new role on June 20.
His appointment will remain in place until the permanent position of executive vice president for Administration and Finance is announced.
“I thank Daren for his support, leadership, and willingness to serve in this capacity as we move forward,” said Cabrera. “He is a trusted and dedicated member of the Institute’s senior leadership team and will provide experienced oversight to A&F and its strategic initiatives during this transitional period.”
Hubbard will continue to lead the ongoing strategic initiatives in A&F designed to create a culture that supports stronger administrative performance and a shared responsibility among the campus community.
“I am honored to help lead A&F during this transition,” said Hubbard. “I am delighted to work with President Cabrera, the executive leadership team, and my colleagues in A&F to continue the work that delivers on the instructional, research, and service missions.”
The search process for the next executive vice president for A&F is in progress, and more information will be shared as soon as it is available.
Additional Images
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000