Share the L.O.V.E. Across Campus
Members of the L.O.V.E. GT working group will join meetings of various campus groups and departments to talk about the Institute’s values and share ways to further incorporate the values into our work.
Apr 27, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
Georgia Tech continues to advance our
nine strategic values
with a campaign called
Living Our Values Every Day
(L.O.V.E. GT). Over the next few weeks, members of the L.O.V.E. GT working group will join meetings of various campus groups and departments to talk about the Institute’s values and share ways to further incorporate them into our work.
The objective of the campaign is to help the entire community bring our values to life in tangible ways that allow us to fulfill the objectives we set forth in the strategic plan. Regardless of a person’s role
—
student, faculty, staff, alumni, or affiliate
—
all of us can contribute by serving as examples of our values in our interactions with one another and with the communities we serve.
To accomplish the ambitious goals of the
10-year strategic plan , having a campus culture that supports Institute values will be critical. The Institute is integrating the values into performance planning through goal setting and through insights gained from a
campus survey .
Opportunities to learn more about Georgia Tech’s strategic values include meetings of the Alumni Association staff on Wednesday, April 28; the Staff Council leadership team on Thursday, April 29; the Employee Engagement Leadership Council general meeting on Thursday, May 6; and upcoming meetings of Georgia Tech’s
Employee Resource Groups
(ERGs).
Additional Images
Related links
Values-Based Learning is Here
Contact
Victor Rogers
Institute Communications
Email
victor.rogers@comm.gatech.edu
Additional information
Georgia Tech’s nine strategic values are:
Students are our top priority.
We strive for excellence.
We thrive on diversity.
We celebrate collaboration.
We champion innovation.
We safeguard freedom of inquiry and expression.
We nurture the well-being of our community.
We act ethically.
We are responsible stewards.
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000