Sherry Farrugia Selected by GCMI Board of Directors as CEO
Sherry Farrugia has been selected by the Global Center for Medical Innovation board of directors as the organization's CEO, effective April 1, 2021.
Sherry Farrugia
Apr 15, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
Sherry Farrugia has been selected by the Global Center for Medical Innovation (GCMI) board of directors as the organization’s CEO, effective April 1, 2021. Farrugia had been serving as interim CEO for GCMI, a Georgia Tech affiliate, since September 2020.
“We are so pleased to congratulate Sherry as she joins GCMI in this capacity,” said Chaouki T. Abdallah, Georgia Tech’s executive vice president for Research. “She was a steadfast advocate, innovator, and leader in her time at Tech and I know she will bring that same dedication to the important, transformational work of GCMI.”
Farrugia came to GCMI from the Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta Pediatric Technology Center at Georgia Tech, where she served as chief operating and strategy officer for 10 years, focusing on accelerating innovation for pediatrics. During that time, Farrugia worked with GCMI on numerous projects. Recently, she played a key part in GCMI’s success supplying frontline healthcare workers with personal protective equipment during the pandemic.
“Sherry Farrugia is nationally recognized for her work in advancing translational medical research, and we are excited that she will continue with GCMI as CEO,” said Bob Crutchfield, chair of the GCMI board of directors and CEO of TeleHealth Solution. “Her visionary leadership, strong community ties, and knowledge of the commercialization ecosystem and medical device strategy and development have been great assets to GCMI thus far and will be instrumental in our path forward.”
Recently, Farrugia was named to the board of directors for the Medical University of South Carolina Foundation for Research Development. She is currently an advisory board member of Atlanta Ronald McDonald House Charities, on the board of directors of the International Society of Pediatric Innovation, and a member of the Southeast Life Sciences Women@SLS advisory board.
“Sherry brings over 30 years’ experience in the healthcare innovation industry,” said Devesh Ranjan, Georgia Tech’s interim vice president for Interdisciplinary Research and Ring Family Chair and professor in the George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering. “Her knowledge and experience are invaluable, and I know she will serve the role well.”
In 2018, Farrugia received the Women in Technology Woman of the Year Award, and she was honored by Georgia Bio for three consecutive years for her work in supporting the life sciences.
“GCMI’s mission and history of working with startups, clinicians, and universities to bring innovative medical products to the world is perfectly aligned with my passion for supporting translational research in the healthcare space,” Farrugia said. “I am so pleased to accept the position as GCMI’s permanent CEO and to continue the important work to accelerate the development, testing, training, and commercialization of life-changing technologies.”
Additional Images
Related links
Global Center for Medical Innovation
Contact
Office of the Executive Vice President for Research
evproffice@gatech.edu
Email
evproffice@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000