Spending Fall Break in Atlanta
With fall break coming up this weekend, students get a two-day reprieve from classes.
Leaves on the ground in November
Oct 13, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
With fall break coming up this weekend, students get a two-day reprieve from classes. For some, this may mean travel — but for those staying on or near campus, there is plenty to enjoy.
Classes will not meet Oct. 17 – 18. Activities happening this weekend include:
Little Five Points Ghost Tours
Oct. 14 – 15
Ghost tours run every weekend this month beginning at 7 p.m. at the Little Five Points Community Center. Tickets are $25.
Women’s Tennis
Oct. 14 – 17
Georgia Tech hosts the ITA Southeast Regionals at the Ken Byers Tennis Complex.
Tiny Doors ATL Open Studio
Saturday, Oct. 15
Get a behind-the-scenes look at Atlanta’s famous Tiny Doors. Meet artist Karen Anderson Singer and check out her studio at Atlantic Station between 10 a.m. and 3 p.m.
Saturday Night Vibes at The Works
Saturday, Oct. 15
The Works, located northwest of campus, hosts DJ Steve every Saturday this month. Enjoy the fall weather with free music and vibes.
Tree Tour en Español
Saturday, Oct. 15
Trees Atlanta hosts a free tour of the Westside Reservoir Park at 10 a.m. Learn about the park’s history and enjoy views of the former Bellwood Quarry. The tour will be offered in Spanish and English.
Georgia Apple Festival
Oct. 15 – 16
If you want to venture further north, enjoy fall festivities at the Georgia Apple Festival in Ellijay. Admission is $10 and includes arts and crafts, vendors, a parade, and an antique car show.
Carve in the Courtyard
Sunday, Oct. 16
Monday Night Brewing Garage hosts a pumpkin carving event, where those of age can also enjoy the launch of new fall brews.
Scarecrows in the Garden
Through Oct. 30
Scarecrows have taken up residence in the Atlanta Botanical Garden this month. Other Halloween-themed events will take place all month long. Admission begins at $25 .
Ponce City Market Pumpkin Patch
Through Oct. 31
Just down North Avenue, Ponce City Market will have a pumpkin patch on the lawn all month. Paint pumpkins, take photos, and get into the spooky spirit.
Additional Images
Contact
Kristen Bailey
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000