Students Asked to Provide Feedback on Classroom Experiences in New Survey
Georgia Tech students will have the opportunity to provide feedback on their classroom experiences this semester through a web survey that will be available beginning Monday, Feb. 22.
Professor Cristi Bell-Huff teaches in a lecture hall in MoSE
Feb 19, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
Georgia Tech students will have the opportunity to provide feedback on their classroom experiences this semester through a web survey that will be available beginning Monday, Feb. 22.
The survey, which takes just 5-7 minutes to complete, gives students a chance to weigh in on topics such as perceptions of instructional effectiveness, student engagement, the usefulness of technology, and the consistency and clarity of communication and expectations. The results of the survey will be shared with campus administrators and the Institute Restart Task Forces to inform planning and support continuous improvement efforts.
Students can expect to receive the survey via their Georgia Tech email on Monday. For questions about the survey or listening sessions, email
kyla.ross@gatech.edu
or
casey.chaviano@gatech.edu .
The Intitute is also seeking faculty and student feedback on classroom experiences through a series of one-hour listening sessions. A total of 24 listening sessions will take place between Feb. 22 and March 12. Students and faculty are encouraged to take part in this effort to hear from the Georgia Tech community on a variety of topics.
Find out more and sign up for a session here.
“We are hoping for a robust response to the survey and listening sessions,” said Kyla Ross, assistant vice provost for Advocacy and Conflict Resolution. “Student voices and input are very valuable as we make ongoing improvements and plan for the future.”
A similar survey was conducted during the Fall 2020 semester, with a total of 6,853 students participating. The
results
were invaluable to administrators and Institute Restart Task Forces as they planned the spring semester.
Additional Images
Contact
Stephanie Kadel
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000