Students Selected as Finalists in National Invention Competition
Team's invention makes it easier to manage warehouse inventory. Oculogx is competing in 2017 Collegiate Inventors Competition.
Sarthak Srinivas, a computer science major, demonstrates an invention that makes it easier to manage warehouse inventory. The device is a finalist for the 2017 Collegiate Inventors Competition. It was also a finalist for Georgia Tech's InVenture Prize. Photo by Rob Felt.
Sep 26, 2017
— Atlanta, GA
An invention from Georgia Tech students that makes it easier to locate items in large warehouses is a finalist for the 2017 Collegiate Inventors Competition, which honors the nation’s top collegiate inventors.
Sarthak Srinivas, a computer science major, and Charu Thomas, an industrial engineering major, lead the team behind
Oculogx , which streamlines the steps it takes to locate and handle items in warehouses. It is a mixed-reality application used with a headset that combines barcode scanning for immediate inventory control with navigation that projects the optimal path through the warehouse to each item.
An earlier iteration, called PickAR, was a
finalist
for the 2017
InVenture Prize , Georgia Tech’s annual invention competition.
The application recently
finished second in the Imagine Cup , a worldwide innovation competition sponsored by Microsoft.
Two other computer science majors, Cheng Hann and
Wenqi Xian, were part of the team during InVenture and assisted with the Microsoft contest.
“We have never forgotten how helpful our mentors and peers at Georgia Tech and the
CREATE-X
program have been,” Srinivas said. “We have made a lot of great progress on our product and have migrated to a new development environment based on Android.”
As part of the
Collegiate Inventors Competition , teams will travel to Washington, D.C., for the event, which will take place from Nov. 1-3. The judges include National Inventors Hall of Fame inductees and leaders from the United States Patent and Trademark Office. Student winners and their advisors will be awarded cash and prizes ranging from $2,500 to $10,000.
The competition, which started in 1990, is considered one of the nation’s foremost competitions encouraging innovation, entrepreneurship, and creativity by recognizing and rewarding college students working on cutting-edge inventions.
Oculogyx also recently won the
Atlanta Startup Battle , which awarded the company $100,000.
Additional Images
Contact
Laura Diamond
Media Relations
404-894-6016
@LauraRDiamond
Email
laura.diamond@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000