Student Input Requested for New On-Campus Mural
The mural will be painted on the brick wall alongside Skiles Walkway.
Living Walls Atlanta, mural at Centennial Olympic Park by artist Hense. Photo credit: Joshua Gwyn.
Sep 23, 2020
— Atlanta, GA
For the first time in Georgia Tech’s history, plans are in place to have a mural painted on campus — specifically, on the Skiles Walkway brick wall. Before the painting can start, however, students are being asked to complete a
survey
about what they think should be included in it. The survey will be open until Wednesday, Sept. 30, with the mural scheduled for completion by the Spring 2021 semester.
Sinet Adous, a fourth-year international affairs major, got the idea for an on-campus mural after spending the spring of her second year working with Living Walls Atlanta, an organization that creates public art displays across the metro Atlanta area.
“Through my experience engaging with the murals around Atlanta, I noticed more aggressively than ever just how separate Georgia Tech felt from the city,” said Adous. “I wanted to bridge this culture gap through art.”
Adous also wants the mural to reflect the diversity of the Georgia Tech experience.
“I couldn't find many representations of people who looked like me or shared my same interests upon first matriculating at Tech,” she said. “Over time, however, I found our student community is richly diverse in more ways than one: in identities, passions, skills, and interests. I wished this was more obvious to me when I began my journey here.”
Last spring, the Student Government Association’s Undergraduate House of Representatives approved funding for the mural through the
Mental Health Joint Allocation Committee . After that, the Georgia Tech administration approved the project.
“I hope this mural can reflect the spirit of our Georgia Tech student community, bring to life all the ways diversity manifests in our community, and bring us closer to the larger city of Atlanta,” Adous said. “We are a vibrant people. We ought to paint it on a wall.”
Additional Images
Contact
Grace Wyner
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000