Student Groups Team Up to Help Students in Need
With the help of the organization Students Organizing for Sustainability (SOS), the STAR program’s Campus Kitchen will be able to continue to provide meals for students on campus.
Mar 25, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
With the help of the organization Students Organizing for Sustainability (SOS), the STAR program’s Campus Kitchen will be able to continue to provide meals for students on campus.
STAR (Students’ Temporary Assistance and Resources)
is under the Division of Student Life and facilitates communication between organizations supporting students in need, such as Campus Closet, which provides clothing for students preparing for interviews, and Campus Kitchen, which hosts volunteer shifts for students to package meals.
SOS heard of STAR’s fundraising efforts earlier this semester to collect funds to keep the campus pantry open and decided to host a raffle to raise money. Each ticket costs $5 and one ticket can count toward one prize basket. The range of baskets includes a Sustainable Living Basket (which includes an indoor mushroom growing kit), two Board Game Bundles, and a School Spirit Basket (featuring a Buzz Pillow Pet). The Student Hospital Connections, Residence Hall Association, Association of Environmental Engineers and Scientists, and Pride Alliance also pitched in and provided donations to make the raffle possible.
With the purchase of at least one ticket, people will automatically be entered to win a $50 Amazon gift card. SOS will also ship the prizes to winners if they are off campus.  The raffle entry will close on Friday, March 26, and the drawing for the winners will take place on March 27 at 7 p.m.
Tickets can be purchased using the following link:
forms.gle/98zExHYJxHUwunAT8
If you have any questions, contact Silas Ever, SOS treasurer, at lever3@gatech.edu.
Additional Images
Contact
Vanesa Vargas
Institute Communications
Email
stucomm@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000