Surveillance Testing Sites Change Next Week
Warm weather has made it conducive to hold asymptomatic surveillance testing primarily outdoors. Now, as the season changes to fall, testing sites are changing, too.
Covid-19 Testing
Sep 30, 2020
— Atlanta, GA
Warm weather has made it conducive to hold asymptomatic surveillance testing primarily outdoors. Now, as the season changes to fall, testing locations are changing, too.
The site at Bobby Dodd Stadium will close for the semester at 5 p.m. on Friday, Oct. 2. In its place, the site at the GT Connector – located just across from the stadium, connected to the Towers and Glenn Residence Halls – will be open Monday through Friday, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., beginning Oct. 5. This site has already been in use on campus, but with limited operating hours.
An additional site will open Monday, Oct. 5, at Price Gilbert Library, in the main entrance on Cherry Street. This site's hours will be Monday and Tuesday, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Wednesday through Thursday, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.; and Friday, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Tech’s other outdoor testing location at the Curran Street Parking Deck site will close on Friday, Oct. 9. A replacement site will be announced soon, at
health.gatech.edu/coronavirus/testing . Other popup sites will continue to open throughout the semester as needed.
All students, faculty, and staff on campus are encouraged to get tested weekly. To register for testing, visit
mytest.gatech.edu . For Covid-19 reporting information, visit
health.gatech.edu/coronavirus/health-alerts .
Beginning Monday, Oct. 5:
GT Connector
116 Bobby Dodd Way NW.  Map and directions .
Hours starting Oct. 5:
Monday – Friday, 9 a.m. – 5 p.m.
Price Gilbert (Main Entrance off of Cherry Street)
Hours starting Oct. 5:
Monday – Tuesday, 9 a.m. – 5 p.m.
Wednesday – Thursday, 9 a.m. – 6 p.m.
Friday, 9 a.m. – 5 p.m.
Other Asymptomatic Testing Sites:
Curran Street Parking Deck (Level 2)
Turner Place entrance facing Nelson-Shell Residence Hall, near West Village Dining.  Map and directions .
Hours : Monday – Friday, 9 a.m. – 5 p.m.
760 Spring Street (1st Floor)
Across from the Coda Building.  Map and directions .
Hours : Wednesdays and Fridays, 9 a.m. – 5 p.m.; Thursdays, 9 a.m. – 7 p.m.
Caddell Building
280 Ferst Drive NW, next to the Pettit Building.
Map and directions .
Hours : Mondays and Tuesdays, 1 – 4 p.m.
North Ave (Centennial Room)
Across from North Avenue Dining Hall entrance.
Map and directions .
Hours : Wednesdays and Thursdays, noon – 4 p.m.
Tenth & Home (Activity Room)
Building A.  Map and directions .
Hours : Fridays, noon – 4 p.m.
Additional Images
Related links
Testing Sites and Locations
Register for Surveillance Testing
Contact
Sara Warner
Student Life
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000