Sustainable Facilities Forum Offers Four Tracks for Exploration
This year's forum will be held Tuesday, Oct. 27, from 1 to 4 p.m.
web banner for SFF 2020
Oct 19, 2020
— Atlanta, GA
Georgia Tech is not alone in its ambitious mission to transform the way students, faculty, and staff relate to the natural environment and how these relationships must continuously strive for sustainability. Facilities Management hosts a forum every year to share with the campus and other community members how Georgia Tech is achieving its sustainability goals.
This year's forum , which will take place Tuesday, Oct. 27, kicks off with speakers from Stanford University, UC Santa Cruz, and Biohabitats, who will share their efforts and experiences in reducing energy and water consumption and minimizing material waste on their campuses.
Next, Facilities Management staff will lead four tracks for exploration: Sustainable Resource Management, The Eco-Commons, The Kendeda Building for Innovative Sustainable Design, and The Historic Sector: Preserve to Conserve.
The event will be hosted virtually and is free for all students, faculty, and staff to attend.
More about this year's tracks:
Sustainable Resource Management
Georgia Tech has been innovating in the areas of hard-to-recycle materials, lab energy cost-savings initatives, and Covid-19 staffing efficiencies to meet sustainability goals. Learn how Georgia Tech responded to Covid-19 in the realm of cleaning and recycling, explore the Smart Labs project from the perspective of blending safety and savings, and understand how nontraditional recyclables on campus are diverted from landfills.
Eco-Commons
A new 7-acre section of the campus Eco-Commons will be opening soon. Take a virtual tour of the space, learn how its interpretive signage will relate to equity and wellness in outdoor spaces, and discover how Georgia Tech is enabling data collection and access for researchers in this on-campus ecosystem.
The Kendeda Building For Innovative Sustainable Design
Virtual tours of The Kendeda Building will focus on how the building is reaching net positive water management and explore its sustainable energy features. The lessons learned during its first year in operation will be shared by Shan Arora, building director.
The Historic Sector: Preserve to Conserve
This track provides an overview of the campus historic preservation plan, the legacy of the Alumni House, and the promising future of East Campus housing.
The forum is co-chaired by Maria Del Mar Ceballos (BIM /VDC Manager) and Malte Weiland (Sustainability Senior Project Manager). Presenters from Capital Planning and Space Management, Building Services and Recycling, Design and Construction, Communications and Analytics, and Environmental Health and Safety will provide the inside story on Georgia Tech's latest campus sustainability efforts.
For more information and to register, visit
the website .
Additional Images
Related links
More Information and Registration
Contact
For more information, contact Maria Del Mar Ceballos at
maria.ceballos@facilities.gatech.edu
or Malte Weiland at
malte.weiland@aux.gatech.edu .
Email
maria.ceballos@facilities.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000