Tech Launches Searches for Chief Research Operations Officer and Research Corporations General Manager
The two national searches are part of an organizational and leadership structure change announced over the summer.
Nov 01, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
Chaouki T. Abdallah, executive vice president for Research (EVPR), has launched two national searches as part of an organizational and leadership structure change announced over the summer.
The first search is for a chief research operations officer. The second search is for an executive director of business operations and general manager for the research corporations, Georgia Tech Research Corporation (GTRC) and Georgia Tech Applied Research Corporation (GTARC). Search firm Isaacson, Miller has been retained to assist with both searches.
As detailed in
June 2022 , the Institute is taking steps to structure and scale its research support functions to enable best-in-class research stewardship and ensure best practices around compliance, visibility, and research integrity. Key to this effort is creating a stronger business and service model to support initiatives, investigators, and continued growth.
Chief research operations officer (CROO)
The search is chaired by Siva Raghupathy, vice president for Commercialization and chief commercialization officer, with an anticipated start in Spring 2023. The CROO will report to the EVPR and embrace a strong operational focus, overseeing Research Integrity Assurance, Research Administration, and Research Development and Operations. The CROO will join a leadership team charged with furthering Georgia Tech’s mission as a top-tier research institution.
A full position description and details for the search, including application and nomination instructions, committee roster, and timeline, can be accessed at
research.gatech.edu/evpr-careers .
Inquiries and nominations are invited and should be sent confidentially to Katie White ( kwhite@imsearch.com ) or Iliana Gonzalez ( igonzalez@imsearch.com ).
Executive director of Business Operations and general manager (EDBO/GM), Georgia Tech Research Corporation and Georgia Tech Applied Research Corporation
The search is chaired by Cynthia Hope, associate vice president for Research Administration, with an anticipated start in Spring 2023.
The role will report to Jim Fortner, vice president for Finance and Planning, and will serve in a critical leadership role to oversee the business of GTRC and GTARC, which contract for sponsored activities for colleges, the Georgia Tech Research Institute (GTRI), and other units at Georgia Tech. The role has business and financial oversight for the corporations, overseeing risk assessment, procurement contract negotiations, financial auditing, and tax preparations.
A full position description and details for the search, including application and nomination instructions, committee roster, and timeline, can be accessed at
research.gatech.edu/evpr-careers .
Inquiries and nominations are invited and should be sent confidentially to Stephen Kalogeras ( skalogeras@imsearch.com ) or Iliana Gonzalez ( igonzalez@imsearch.com ).
Additional Images
Contact
The Office of the Executive Vice President for Research
Email
evproffice@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000