Tech Prepares to Welcome New Student Employees
The Administrative Services Center is looking forward to welcoming thousands of new student employees for the fall semester.
Aug 08, 2023
The Administrative Services Center (ASC) is looking forward to welcoming thousands of new student employees for the fall semester. To help them complete the hiring and onboarding process, the ASC will host the annual Student Employee Onboarding event Aug. 16-18 on the third floor of the Clough Undergraduate Learning Commons. The event is open to all newly hired graduate and undergraduate student employees who need assistance completing their in-person onboarding requirements (e.g., Form I-9 verification and notarized Georgia Security Questionnaire).
All student employees must complete all steps of the onboarding process, including the in-person requirements, and be hired in OneUSG Connect before beginning work.
New student employees should visit
ohr.gatech.edu/student-onboarding
for step-by-step instructions on completing the onboarding process, including
required documentation .
Selecting a Time Slot
Email communications will be sent directly to newly hired student employees who have already completed the online Student Hiring Packet ( step 1 of the onboarding process ) but who still need to complete the in-person onboarding requirement. These students will have the ability to select a 30-minute time slot between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. on Aug. 16, 17, or 18.
Need to Complete In-Person Onboarding but Cannot Attend this Event?
If you are a newly hired student and need to complete your Form I-9 and/or notarized Georgia Security Questionnaire, but cannot attend this in-person event, contact the ASC for assistance about onboarding and all questions related to working at Georgia Tech.
Call 404.385.1111 to schedule an appointment at the ASC.
Schedule a walk-up appointment online  here .
Submit an online Request for Help ticket  here . You will need to login for enhanced services.
If you are in the U.S. but not in the Atlanta area and need a remote option, please contact the ASC to find an appropriate location near you.
Already Completed the In-Person Onboarding?
Great! Student employees who have already completed in-person onboarding at the ASC, located at 500 Tech Parkway, do not need to attend the Student Employee Onboarding event.
Other Important Notes
The Student Employee Onboarding event is not an opportunity for students to find a campus job. It is the final step in paperwork processing for those hired into an already accepted campus position. If you are looking for a job, visit the
Student Employment webpage
for helpful resources.
Hiring managers and their hiring support staff are encouraged to be prepared and familiarize themselves with new and helpful resources designed to promote a seamless experience. Learn more
here .
The ASC is here to help students and managers navigate hiring and onboarding processes. Visit the
ASC portal
for assistance.
Additional Images
Related links
Student Employment website
Student Onboarding
Administrative Services Center Portal
Contact
Rachael Pocklington
Institute Communications
Email
rpocklington@gatech.edu
Additional information
Improving the Hiring Process From Start to Finish
Since opening less than a year ago, the ASC has been dedicated to analyzing the student hiring process and developing innovative solutions to improve the experience. This includes partnering with Georgia Tech Human Resources and others to develop new and improved guides and toolkits for hiring students.
Improved integrations with GradWorks improves the flow of information to the ASC and reduces process time.
New eRequest Report enables units to have greater visibility into the hiring process.
Additional staff are being hired to assist with seasonal volume.
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000