Tech Faculty Tapped for Regents' Awards
The University System of Georgia Board of Regents tapped several members of the Georgia Tech faculty for Regents’ Awards
Koan at Georgia Tech
Aug 11, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
Along with the Georgia Tech faculty tapped and reappointed as Regents’ Professors and Researchers at the Aug. 9 University System of Georgia (USG) Board of Regents meeting were five Georgia Tech professors named to the new distinction of Regents’ Entrepreneur.
Georgia Tech faculty named as the first Regents' Entrepreneurs in the USG include Farrokh Ayazi, Ken Byers Professor in Microsystems, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering; Kirk Bowman, professor, Sam Nunn School of International Affairs; Andrei Fedorov, Neely Chair and professor, George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering and the Petit Institute for Bioengineering and Bioscience; Mark Prausnitz, Regents’ Professor, J. Erskine Love Jr. Chair, School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering; and Gleb Yushin, professor, School of Materials Science and Engineering.
Regents’ Professor First-Time Appointments
The Board of Regents approved the title of Regents’ Professor to Facundo Fernández, professor and Vasser Woolley Foundation Chair in Bioanalytical Chemistry, School of Chemistry and Biochemistry; Willie Pearson, professor, School of History and Sociology; Krishnendu Roy, professor, Robert A. Milton Endowed Chair, NSF Engineering Research Center for Cell Manufacturing Technologies, Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering; and Beril Toktay, professor of Operations Management and Brady Family Chair, Scheller College of Business.
Regents’ Researcher First-Time Appointments
Those named as Regents’ Researchers include Stephen Balakirsky, principal research scientist, Georgia Tech Research Institute (GTRI); Anton Bryksin, principal research scientist, Petit Institute for Bioengineering and Bioscience; Walter Bradley Fain, principal research scientist, School of Public Policy; and Anita Pavadore, principal research engineer, GTRI.
First-Time Reappointments
Receiving a first-time reappointment as Regents’ Professor was Surya Kalidindi, Regents’ Professor, Rae S. and Frank H. Neely Chair, George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering. Receiving a first-time reappointment as Regents’ Researcher was Margaret Loper, principal research scientist, GTRI.
Other Reappointments
Regents’ Professor and Researcher designations only require Institute approval for second-time reappointments. Second-time Regents’ Professor appointments at Georgia Tech include Sy Goodman, Regents’ Professor, Sam Nunn School of International Affairs; Nicholas Hud, Regents’ Professor, School of Chemistry and Biochemistry; and Vladimir Tsukruk, Regents’ Professor, School of Materials Science and Engineering. Receiving a second-time Regents’ Researcher reappointment was Alexa Harter, director of the Cybersecurity, Information Protection, and Hardware Evaluation Research Laboratory at GTRI.
New Recognition for Entrepreneurship and Innovation
The board approved the Regents’ Entrepreneur designation in their February 2022 meeting to recognize and support faculty entrepreneurship and innovation. The Regents’ Entrepreneur designation may be granted by the Board of Regents to an outstanding full-time tenured faculty member who has an established reputation as a successful innovator and who has taken their research into a commercial setting. The Regents’ Entrepreneur designation is bestowed by the board only upon the unanimous recommendation of the USG institution president, the chief academic officer, and the chancellor, and upon the approval of the Committee on Academic Affairs.
Farrokh Ayazi
Farrokh Ayazi is director of the Georgia Tech Analog Consortium. His main research interest is in integrated micro and nano electromechanical systems and integrated microsystem design. He is the founder and chief technology officer of Qualtré, which was acquired by Panasonic in 2016. He is currently leading StethX Microsystems, an ATDC company, in commercializing advanced wearable sensors for cardiopulmonary applications.
Kirk Bowman
Kirk Bowman is the Rise Up & Care term chair in Global Development and Identity. In 2014, Bowman founded Rise Up & Care, a nonprofit corporation that employs an innovative model of international community development, combining global development research; high-level performance organizations in the Global South to transform youth; powerful documentary films by top local directors; and children's books illustrated by local street artists. He directs a Georgia Tech Vertically Integrated Project on Global Social Entrepreneurship with 18 undergraduate students.
Andrei G. Fedorov
Andrei G. Fedorov’s research covers atomic scale nanomanufacturing; distributed power generation with carbon dioxide management; instrumentation for biomedical research; and thermal management of electronics and medicine. With his students and collaborators, Fedorov started several technology companies to commercialize his inventions in the space of gene/drug delivery; biomarker discovery and quality control in cell therapy manufacturing; and thermal management of high-power generation devices.
Mark Prausnitz
Mark Prausnitz has co-founded seven companies that have together raised more than $350 million for commercialization of microneedle technologies developed in his lab at Georgia Tech. Three of the companies have products for sale, including an FDA-approved treatment of ocular inflammation. His technologies have been studied in more than 20 human clinical trials. He has almost 80 issued or pending U.S. patents, with additional international filings. Prausnitz has published more than 300 journal articles and supervised 50 Ph.D. students among a total of almost 350 graduate, postdoctoral, or undergraduate researchers in his lab.
Gleb Yushin
Gleb Yushin is a pioneer and globally recognized leader in advanced materials for next-generation Li-ion batteries. He is member of the National Academy of Inventors and fellow of three international professional societies. He has been awarded more than 200 patents, while also being one of the most cited Georgia Tech professors since 2019. He co-founded the most economically successful Georgia Tech startup Sila Nanotechnologies ($3.3B valuation). Yushin has served as a founding faculty advisor for the Entrepreneurs Club at Tech and as an advisor to the Georgia Tech startup CellFE.
Regents’ Professorships and Regents’ Researcher titles may be granted for a period of three years by the Board of Regents to outstanding faculty members of Georgia Tech, Augusta University, Georgia State University, the University of Georgia, and, in special circumstances, other USG institutions.
Additional Images
Contact
Dawn Baunach, Associate Vice Provost for Faculty
Email
dawn.baunach@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000