Tech Square to Host 2019 Association of University Research Parks International Conference
The AURP conference attracts science and research park directors, economic developers, intellectual property and venture capital firms and others.
Tech Square
Nov 02, 2018
— Atlanta, GA
Georgia Tech’s Technology Square – one of the nation’s premier innovation districts and a leader in research and economic development – will host the Association of University Research Parks (AURP) 2019 International Conference.
AURP's mission is to foster innovation, commercialization and economic growth through university, industry and government partnerships. Each year, AURP’s international conference attracts a diverse group, including science and research park directors, economic developers, and intellectual property and venture capital firms.
“Georgia Tech is proud to host AURP’s 2019 International Conference,” said Chaouki Abdallah, executive vice president for research. “Tech Square is a testament to what is possible when higher education, government, business and the community work together. As the Southeast’s premier innovation district, Tech Square promotes a community of innovation, education and intelligent exchange.”
In 2014, the group named Tech Square its “Outstanding Research Park Award” winner.
Tech Square opened in 2003 in Midtown Atlanta with the goal of strengthening the connection between the Institute and the business community. Today the area is a thriving innovation ecosystem thanks to a network of students, faculty, researchers, startup entrepreneurs and global corporations.
“Tech Square is a globally recognized destination for innovation,” said AURP President Mason Ailstock. “Through Georgia Tech’s leadership, Tech Square creates intentional collisions between industry partners, entrepreneurs and the university. AURP is thrilled to showcase the breadth and depth of Atlanta and Georgia Tech to the 2019 conference attendees.”
Tech Square is comprised of more than 2 million square feet of office, research, retail, residential and hotel space, including the Technology Square Research Building, the Biltmore, Global Learning Center, the Scheller College of Business and the new Coda building, which will open in 2019.
More than 100 companies, employing 15,000, people are located in the 10-block area of Midtown Atlanta. Nearly 30 major companies run corporate design, innovation, technology development and research centers in or near the area, including Anthem, AT&T, Delta Air Lines, Home Depot, NCR, Southern Company and UCB.
While these corporate operations represent a wide range of industries, they all seek to tap into the area’s culture of collaboration — and its talent pool.
Tech Square is one reason why Atlanta is among the top cities for corporate innovation, said Greg King, associate vice president for economic development at Georgia Tech and an AURP board member.
“With a density that helps to accelerate innovation and development, Tech Square brings together education, research and corporate partnerships,” King said. “Georgia Tech has also fostered an environment where corporate innovators can learn from each other and experienced entrepreneurs mentor younger startups. We’re excited to be able to showcase Tech Square, Georgia Tech and the community of innovation represented here.”
Additional Images
Email
laura.diamond@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000