Tech Students Wow Mercedes-Benz Stadium With Innovative Ideas
For the second year in a row, members of the Sports Business Club participated in a case competition based around the business side of the Atlanta Falcons.
Nov 28, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
Non-fungible tokens, cutting-edge apps, and radiofrequency identification (RFID) bands were just a few of the ideas recently presented by Tech students to the people of Arthur M. Blank Sports and Entertainment (AMBSE), the parent company of the Atlanta Falcons, Atlanta United, and Mercedes-Benz Stadium. For the second year in a row, members of the Sports Business Club participated in a case competition based around the business side of the Atlanta Falcons. This year, students worked to solve the issue of creating new, young fans who will remain fans for life.
The Sports Business Club at Georgia Tech seeks to help students bridge the gap between the worlds of sports and business.
“We bring in executives of sports teams as well as those who work in other facets surrounding the industry like retail,” said Gavin Lambert, vice president of project management for the club. “One such speaker was Mark Cuban.”
One of the club’s biggest partners is AMBSE. This case competition benefits both sides as the club is provided with real-life data they use to offer new, innovative ideas to the company. The competition also helps students develop storytelling skills and understand their audience while creating a sense of competition that all sports fans love.
Make no mistake, this is a serious competition. Planning began this January and was biweekly until the day of the final presentations on Nov. 7. Twenty-seven teams spanning 14 majors entered. In a short period of time, they had to create a pitch that was judged before six teams were chosen to move on to the final round.
These six teams gave 15-minute presentations to six executives at AMBSE.
Judges awarded prizes to the top three teams, and one group received the people’s choice award. The top winners proposed using RFID bands to engage younger fans through rewards while tracking their purchasing habits, and the people’s choice winners proposed the creation of an area near the stadium that could be used for tailgating and other sports-related events. These prizes totaled $10,000.
But students gained something much more valuable from the experience.
“Sports teams and companies usually leverage the passion of individuals to provide worse salaries and benefits,” Lambert said. “With AMBSE, they do not have to make a tradeoff between enjoying their job and making money.” Many students in the Sports Business Club find jobs with the company, and this competition is one of the best ways to create that connection.
Additional Images
Contact
Connor White
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000