Testing Sites Welcome Campus Community for Spring Semester
As the spring semester gets underway, Georgia Tech’s asymptomatic surveillance testing program is up and running at full capacity to serve the campus community.
Georgia Tech research technician Fang Shi places vials containing saliva tests into a device used to prepare samples for testing. (Credit: Rob Felt, Georgia Tech)
Jan 11, 2021
— Atlanta, GA
As the spring semester gets underway, Georgia Tech’s asymptomatic surveillance testing program is up and running at full capacity to serve the campus community.
If you’ve made weekly testing a habit, the process is the same, with minor changes to improve the experience for participants. If you’re new to campus,
learn more about testing
and plan to participate weekly. Register at
mytest.gatech.edu .
What’s the same
All students, faculty, and staff on campus are encouraged to test weekly.
Testing will be available at multiple sites across campus.
View testing sites and hours .
Treats and swag items will be offered at testing sites.
What’s different
You will no longer need to scan your BuzzCard when you test. The process has been streamlined to eliminate the need for this step.
Additional testing locations will be available.
Sites at the Price Gilbert Library, 760 Spring Street, GT Connector, and Couch Building will be open five days a week. Additional sites will be operated by mobile teams and set up one to two days a week.
Hours will continue to be updated here each week .
Those who are experiencing symptoms consistent with Covid-19 should seek diagnostic testing, not surveillance testing. Students can be tested at Stamps Health Services; employees should seek testing from their primary care doctor or a public health
testing location .
Georgia Tech is also in the process of planning for vaccinations on campus, and staff at Stamps Health Services and other first responders will be the first to receive vaccinations. More information will be shared as it becomes available.
All students, faculty, and staff are encouraged to continue to test, wear face coverings, keep physical distance, and wash their hands frequently to prevent the spread of the coronavirus. For additional information and preventive measures, visit
health.gatech.edu/tech-moving-forward .
Additional Images
Related links
Campus Covid-19 Testing
Campus Covid-19 Health Alerts
Asymptomatic Testing Program Helps Control Covid-19
Register for Testing
Georgia DPH Covid-19 Testing
Contact
Kristen Bailey
Institute Communications
Additional information
Flu season is still underway. If you have not received a flu shot, make an appointment to do so.
More information is available from Stamps Health Services .
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000