Things to do in Atlanta Over Spring Break
As the weather begins to warm, and the flowers begin to bloom, opportunities to explore the city or attend athletics events abound.
Bright yellow blooms of golden ragwort (packera aurea) are visible in the EcoCommons near The Kendeda Building for Innovative Sustainable Design. Photo by Allison Carter.
Mar 15, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
Spring break is quickly approaching. While many students will head home or on vacation, some will stay on campus. Luckily, there is always something fun to do in Atlanta.
As the weather begins to warm, and the flowers begin to bloom, opportunities to explore the city or attend athletics events abound.
Men’s Tennis vs. Virginia
Friday, March 18, 5 p.m.
Georgia Tech hosts the Virginia Cavaliers at the Ken Byers Tennis Complex.
Baseball vs. Wake Forest
Saturday, March 19, 4 p.m.
Georgia Tech hosts Wake Forest at Mac Nease Baseball Park.
Baseball vs. Kennesaw State
Wednesday, March 23, 6 p.m.
Georgia Tech hosts the Kennesaw State Owls at Mac Nease Baseball Park.
Dunwoody Nature Center Bird Walk
Saturday, March 26, 8 – 10 a.m.
The Dunwoody Nature Center offers a free bird walk with the Georgia Audubon. The walk is a great walk to learn about Georgia’s resident and migrating birds. Registration is requested in advance.
Atlanta Science Festival
Through March 26
This event has already begun and will continue through the end of spring break. Some events include geocaching around the city and walking through the forests of Fernbank. These events also range in age of audience and location. The overall goal is to foster enthusiasm for the sciences all around Atlanta. The festival culminates with the Exploration Expo on March 26 from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. in Piedmont Park.
NCAA Swimming and Diving Championships
Through March 26
Both women’s and men’s finals will take place on campus at the McAuley Aquatic Center during spring break.
Storyteller at the Swan Gallery
Through March 31
The Swan Coach House Gallery is hosting Storyteller, an exhibition that attempts to tell how stories have changed over time through many different forms of art, including lithographs and sculptures. Attendance is free. The exhibition runs through March 31, and an artist talk will take place Saturday, March 19, at 3 p.m.
World of Coca-Cola
Through March 31
The World of Coca-Cola is running a special on its Friends and Family Four-Pack of tickets. From March 14-31, guests can purchase up to four general admission tickets to the downtown attraction for $50 – a savings of $22. No discount code is required.
Additional Images
Contact
Connor White
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000