Things to Do Over Thanksgiving Break
Thanksgiving Break is quickly approaching, and while some people are going to be making the journey home, many are staying on campus.
Students Walking Amid Fall Leaves
Nov 22, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
Thanksgiving Break is quickly approaching, and while some people are going to be making the journey home, many are staying on campus. With five free days, there is plenty of time to explore attractions in the Atlanta area.
The
Piedmont Holiday Gift Market
is being held this weekend from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. on both Saturday and Sunday. The market will transform the park into a winter wonderland with hot cocoa and music. Hundreds of local artists will be selling holiday-themed items ranging from wreaths to jewelry. This event is close to campus in Piedmont Park and free to explore, so it is a perfect way to get into the holiday spirit.
Garden Lights, Holiday Nights
takes place behind Piedmont Park in the Atlanta Botanical Garden. Every year, the gardens are covered in lights to celebrate the season. This year, the glowing grove and ice goddess add a new twist to the traditions. Tickets are available each night from 5 to 10 p.m.
Several ice rinks around Midtown will get people moving any time of the day. The two closest ice rinks to campus are at
Park Tavern in Piedmont Park
and
Atlantic Station . Park Tavern tickets are $15, and Atlantic Station tickets are $16. Tickets may sell out ahead of time, so make sure to plan accordingly.
Lights of Life
is the perfect drive-thru showing of lights for anyone who wants to see houses decorated with lavish light displays. Every night, the area is transformed with lights, a petting zoo, and train rides. The cost is $10 per car.
On campus, students can also support Georgia Tech Athletics at home games during the break. Volleyball hosts Florida State on Saturday, Nov. 26, at 1 p.m. at O’Keefe Gymnasium. Men’s basketball hosts North Alabama on Saturday, Nov. 26, at 4 p.m. at McCamish Pavilion. See a
full sports schedule
and
ticket information .
Additional Images
Contact
Connor White
Institute Communications
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000