Three Tech Projects Tackle Cancer With ARPA-H Support
Federal Research Awards Total $119 Million
Researchers, from left, Lorena Chaves, Jose Assumpcao, and Philip Santangelo will be part of a collaborative effort to use mRNA drugs to enhance the body’s immune response. Santangelo is leading the $24 million project supported by the federal Advanced Research Projects Agency for Health. (Photo: Jack Kearse)
Sep 29, 2023
The Georgia Institute of Technology is at the forefront of developing technologies and solutions related to cancer detection and treatment, thanks to support from the
Advanced Research Projects Agency for Health
(ARPA-H).
President Joe Biden’s Cancer Moonshot initiative aims to cut the cancer death rate by half in 25 years. Three projects connected to Georgia Tech, which have collectively received $119 million from ARPA-H, are doing just that.
With a grant worth up to $50 million, Georgia Tech will lead development of a new generation of cancer tests capable of detecting multiple types of tumors earlier than ever. Led by biomedical engineer
Gabe Kwong , the project will map the unique cellular profiles of cancer cells and leverage that knowledge to build new bioengineered sensors to detect those profiles. The goal is to create a new kind of multi-cancer early detection test that would allow oncologists to start treating the tumors sooner, when they’re still small and most responsive.
The project is the third with ties to Georgia Tech received in recent weeks. Professor Philip Santangelo, professor in the Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering at Georgia Tech and Emory University,
received the first tranche of funding from the agency
— $24 million — for a project building a toolbox of mRNA drugs to activate or shut off specific genes to help the immune system fight cancer and other disorders.
Josiah Hester in the School of Interactive Computing
is co-principal investigator of a $45 million Rice University-led effort to develop an implant to help the body better respond to cancer treatments.
Celine Lin , associate professor in the School of Computer Science, is working with Hester to develop ultra-energy-efficient chips for signal processing and embedded control. Together, they will develop a robust platform that is energy-efficient enough to last for months.
“At ARPA-H, we recognize the urgency of the health challenges facing cancer patients and their families.” said ARPA-H Director Renee Wegrzyn, “and we are committed to funding truly transformative research that can improve health outcomes for everyone.”
Read more about the three projects:
$50M Cancer Moonshot Grant Will Build an Atlas for Earlier Cancer Detection
Computing Faculty Supporting Research That Could Cut Cancer Deaths in Half
BME Researchers Lead $24M Project Using mRNA to ‘Turn On’ Helpful Immune Responses
Additional Images
Related links
$50M Cancer Moonshot Grant Will Build an Atlas for Earlier Cancer Detection
Computing Faculty Supporting Research That Could Cut Cancer Deaths in Half
BME Researchers Lead $24M Project Using mRNA to ‘Turn On’ Helpful Immune Respo…
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000