Tips to Help You Have a Safe Spring Break
No matter what your plans – you don’t want to wake up your first day back more stressed, exhausted, or overwhelmed than when you left.
Students Walk on Campus During Springtime
Mar 11, 2024
Spring break is almost here, and you may have plans to travel home, head to the beach, explore overseas, or relax during a staycation. No matter what your plans, you don’t want to wake up on your first day back feeling more stressed, exhausted, or overwhelmed than when you left.
“Breaks from class and work are always welcome, but these are also times when we may be in unfamiliar territory, out of our routine, or behaving differently than we normally would,” Joi Alexander, director of the
Wellness Empowerment Center , said. “During these times, it’s important to take care of yourself and be mindful of your surroundings to ensure you have the best experience possible.”
To make sure you get what you want out of spring break, here are some important safety considerations to keep in mind, whether at home, on the beach, or abroad.
If you choose to travel, make sure someone close to you knows the address where you are staying.
Keep your driver’s license, ID, or passport with you at all times.
Educate yourself on federal, state, and local laws where you are traveling.
If road tripping, don’t drive distracted or while tired.
If you are over the age of 21 and choose to drink, set a limit, pace yourself, and alternate alcoholic drinks with water to stay hydrated.
Protect yourself from the sun by drinking lots of water, eating, and always wearing a broad-spectrum SPF 15 or higher sunscreen (reapply every two hours).
If you choose to be sexually active, make sure it’s a consensual experience and always use protection.
Use a buddy system with a group of people you are familiar with if you choose to go out.
If you are not traveling for spring break, staycations are a great budget-friendly option that allows time to practice self-care. Here are a few ways to
spend the break locally .
In addition to sharing best practices, the Wellness Empowerment Center and other Student Engagement and Well-Being departments are also hosting Safe Spring Break, with fun activities, games, and giveaways that educate students about protecting themselves while still having good time.
“We do this event every year, and it’s always a hit with the students,” Alexander said. “It’s just as much fun as it is educational, and it’s the perfect way to kick off a safe spring break.”
This year’s event will take place Tuesday, March 12, from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. on Tech Green. Students can RSVP through
Engage
or just drop by.
For more tips on how to promote health and wellness or to learn more about the Wellness Empowerment Center, visit the department’s
website ,
follow @gtwellnesscenter on Instagram , or
sign up
for the Well Burdell monthly newsletter.
Contact
Ashlie Bowman
Student Engagement and Well-Being
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000