Vidal Annan Jr. Named Senior Director of the Center for Mental Health Care and Resources
Following a national search, Vidal Annan Jr. has been named the new senior director of the Center for Mental Health Care and Resources.
Jun 07, 2023
Following a national search, Vidal Annan Jr., clinical psychologist and director of Counseling and Alcohol and Other Drug Services at Kean University in Union, New Jersey, has been named the new senior director of the
Center for Mental Health Care and Resources .
Annan received his Ph.D. from Rutgers University in 2000 with a focus on cognitive processing and experimental psychology. After graduating, he worked for three years at the Rutgers University Center for Cognitive Science, researching visual perception and attention topics. Upon receiving his clinical license, Annan worked in several mental health and wellness areas, including K-12 schools and universities, youth development programs, hospitals, mental health consulting, and private practice.
Luoluo Hong, vice president for
Student Engagement and Well-Being , said, “Vidal Annan demonstrated a keen interest in Georgia Tech’s mission and strategic priorities during his campus interview. His record of service exhibits strong leadership, creativity, and commitment to students in his prior work, and I am confident that he will assist our team in meeting our goals and vision for the Center for Mental Health Care and Resources.”
Over the course of his career, Annan has taught and presented at several colleges and universities, including Barnard College, Vanderbilt University, Kean, and Rutgers. He has received grants from foundations such as Autism Speaks, the Healthcare Foundation of New Jersey, and the Prudential Foundation to conduct program development and clinical work on emotional intelligence, growth mindset, and socio-emotional learning with adolescents and young adults.
“I am very excited that Vidal Annan will be joining us as the senior director for the Center for Mental Health Care and Resources,” said John M. Stein, associate vice president for Student Life and dean of students, and supervisor for this role. “He is an experienced and skilled practitioner and leader.”
Annan regularly works with several other offices in the Wellness Center and across campus to support students’ well-being and embed evidence-based mental health practices in the university environment. As a clinician, he specializes in several treatment approaches, including acceptance and commitment therapy, cognitive-behavioral therapy, motivational interviewing, and person-centered psychotherapy. His empathetic approach focuses on students’ lived experiences, and he works to empower them to set and work toward their personal, social, and professional goals.
“I’m very excited to join the Georgia Tech team and look forward to working with these dedicated professionals to continue to bring high-quality mental health care to the students of the Institute,” said Annan, who will start in his new role July 17.
Additional Images
Email
Sara.warner@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000