VOICE Team Expands On-Call Services With RAINN
Georgia Tech VOICE is expanding their services by partnering with RAINN, a national sexual assult hotline service with trained staff that will provide additional service to the Georgia Tech community.
Apr 13, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
VOICE , Georgia Tech’s sexual violence prevention and victim-survivor support program, has been available 24/7 for several years. They are now expanding their services by partnering with RAINN, a national sexual assault hotline service with trained staff that will provide additional service to the Georgia Tech community. This expansion centralizes the support service to a single phone number (404.894.9000) instead of calling one number during the day and the Georgia Tech Police Department (GTPD) after hours.
“Victims and survivors of sexual violence come from a diverse range of backgrounds, experiences, and identities. In order to effectively support them, we have to offer an array of options for them to reach out for assistance and support at Georgia Tech. This partnership with RAINN helps us expand beyond GTPD and other existing avenues for seeking help,” said Luoluo Hong, vice president for Student Engagement and Well-Being, who is herself a campus rape survivor.
RAINN has a national reputation for its 24/7/365 hotline that is used by peer institutions as a university-branded service. RAINN volunteers responding to calls will identify themselves as representatives of the VOICE hotline. They receive extensive training in the areas of sexual violence, trauma, and crisis intervention. They also receive training about Georgia Tech and Atlanta-specific resources. If students need to access additional services such as transportation to a rape crisis center or police department, assistance with a time-sensitive academic accommodation, or resolution of safety concerns, RAINN will convey those needs to the VOICE Advocate.
As part of Georgia Tech Health Initiatives,
VOICE
is a confidential resource, independent from law enforcement or the Title IX Office. During the summer of 2020, VOICE moved to enhance its system so that all students would feel safer and more comfortable accessing VOICE services.
VOICE will continue to provide the same services to students who experience any form of sexual violence, including sexual assault, sexual harassment, intimate partner violence, or stalking. Classmates, friends, family members, and others who support survivors can also reach out for services and information on how to help.
VOICE commemorates Sexual Assault Awarness Month (SAAM) in April with Teal Ribbon Day today, April 14. All Yellow Jackets are invited to pick up a teal ribbon on Tech Green and wear it on April 14 in honor of all sexual violence victims and survivors.
For more information about Georgia Tech VOICE :  https://voice.gatech.edu . To connect with a VOICE Advocate any time of day or night, call 404.894.9000.
Additional Images
Contact
Sara Warner Sara.warner@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000