What's Behind the Construction Fences
The progress of campus construction keeps a steady pace year-round.
Artist rendering (subject to change) of the new residence hall planned for the west side of campus along Northside Drive.
Feb 26, 2024
With the recent publication of the
Comprehensive Campus Plan , the possibilities for the evolution of the Georgia Tech campus over the next 10 years are coming into focus.
Several projects with more immediate impact are underway, such as new construction, building renovations, critical campus infrastructure improvements, and exterior installations. As the campus evolves, here’s the latest on what’s behind the construction fences and on the design tables.
Recently Completed
Georgia Tech Veterans Walk of Honor
This
tribute project , located outside the Veterans Resource Center, honors Georgia Tech alumni, students, and staff who have served in the U.S. armed forces. The space was dedicated in a ceremony on Jan. 10.
National Pan-Hellenic Council – Divine Nine Plaza
The Divine Nine are the nine historically Black fraternities and sororities that comprise the National Pan-Hellenic Council. A
plaza area
with nine distinct circular gathering spaces is located adjacent to the John Lewis Student Center parking deck.
Soon to Wrap Up
Science Square
Located just off North Avenue near Northside Drive, Phase 1 of Science Square features a 13-story tower with clean rooms, labs, offices, and research space, as well as the Grace Residences, which include 500 residential units and ground floor retail space. BioSpark Labs, also located in Science Square, are fully furnished and available for lease. A ribbon-cutting celebration for this 18-acre biomedical research and technology community is scheduled for April. Learn more about
Science Square
and
BioSparks Labs .
In Progress
Administrative Services Center Parking Lot Closure
As a result of the construction activities related to the
Campus Connectivity Plan , HR services provided by the Administrative Services Center are temporarily moving from 500 Tech Parkway across the street to 755 Marietta Street. The parking lot at 500 Tech Parkway is closed until June. Visitor parking is available in the 755 Marietta Street parking lot. For any questions, please call the ASC customer service team at 404.385.1111.
Learn more .
Aerospace Engineering Aircraft Hangar
The Aircraft Hangar is located in the North Avenue Research Area. It will serve as a facility to design, assemble, and house small aircraft for research in the Daniel Guggenheim School of Aerospace Engineering. The hangar will be approximately 10,000 square feet and feature a high bay with a mezzanine level. Site work is scheduled for March, with an expected completion date of mid-2025.
D.M. Smith Building Renewal
Renovations include upgrades to the building’s infrastructure, including strengthening compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act by creating wheelchair access and adding an elevator, and new mechanical, electrical, and plumbing systems. A virtual lab and hoteling space will be created for the School of Public Policy. Interior demolition and abatement are underway, with the project targeting a high LEED certification. In support of our campus climate goals, electrification plans are in place, and the renovated building will no longer rely on steam from the central plant for daily operation. Renovations should be complete by mid-2025.
East Campus Streetscape
Renovation of sidewalks and roadways on the east side of campus is underway to improve pedestrian and micromobility (lightweight, single-person vehicles such as bicycles, scooters, and skateboards) access while supporting the Institute’s safety, connectivity, and carbon neutrality goals. Improvements to sidewalks, bicycle infrastructure, and lighting will align with paving, new curbing, and reconfigured access to Peters Parking Deck for alternative-mode routes. All updates will cohesively coordinate with the campus bus systems. Phase 1, addressing Fourth Street, Brittain Drive, and areas adjacent to Peters, is complete. Phase 2a is underway, encompassing the areas near the Third Street tunnel and adjacent sections of Techwood Drive. The project is expected to be complete by the end of 2024.
Read more
here .
Ferst Drive Realignment and Cycle Track
This realignment, safety, and connectivity project will provide bicycle infrastructure and safety improvements via separation of bikes, pedestrians, vehicles, and buses at the bus stops. Phase 1 of the cycle track installation is underway along Ferst Drive near the CRC field to Atlantic Drive. Phase 2 will include installation of the cycle track from Atlantic Drive through Fowler Street. This project will also eventually address the realignment of Ferst Drive at Regents Drive, which will eliminate the traffic signal and enable connectivity to the planned bicycle infrastructure southwest of campus. The project is slated for completion by early 2025.
Read more here .
Infrastructure Improvements for Campus Chilled Water System
The chilled water distribution system is responsible for indoor air cooling and has served the campus well for many years. Current system improvements include the replacement or installation of isolation valves, which will allow problem areas to be easily repaired with less interruption of service to the entire system.
The first phase of improvements occurred during winter break and reached completion ahead of schedule. Currently, teams from Infrastructure and Sustainability and the Office of Emergency Management are working with building managers to prepare for the next planned outage, scheduled to occur during spring break.
Thomas A. Fanning Student-Athlete Performance Center
The 100,000-square-foot facility will be built in the footprint of the current Edge Center in the northeast corner of Bobby Dodd Stadium. The Fanning Center will feature strength and conditioning space, nutrition areas, sports medicine offices, ticket sales, dining, and academic support space, as well as state-of-the art sport science and analytics spaces and balcony views of Midtown Atlanta. The project is in the early stages of permitting and site work, with Techwood Drive lane closures beginning soon. Project completion is scheduled for early 2026.
Read more here .
Tech Square Phase 3
This final phase of Tech Square will include 415,000 square feet of academic and research space within two high-rise towers. The 14-story Scheller Tower will house the MBA and Executive Education programs for the Scheller College of Business and is named in recognition of the philanthropic commitment of Roberta and Ernest Scheller Jr., IM 1952, HON Ph.D. 2013. The 18-story George Tower, named to recognize Penny and Bill George, IE 1964, HON Ph.D. 2008, for their support for the facility, will be the new home for the H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering. A large plaza and retail space are planned for the street level. Ground and utilities work are underway, with a projected occupancy date of early 2026.
Read more here .
Celebrating Women at Georgia Tech
Located in the heart of campus near the John Lewis Student Center, this installation will celebrate the history of women at Georgia Tech, including staff, faculty, and alumnae. It honors women’s accomplishments and contributions to the Institute and to a wide range of fields in which they have made an impact. It will also allow space for reflection and contemplation. The project has broken ground and construction fencing has been installed, and it is scheduled for completion in October 2024.
On the Horizon
Arts Square
Arts Square, an adaptive reuse project planned for the site of the former Randall Brothers buildings, will be a destination space designed to explore the intersection of art and technology. Supporting education, research, and culture, Arts Square will help Georgia Tech engage with Georgia's multibillion-dollar creative media industries. Programming and feasibility studies are underway to explore the best use of these 7.5 acres along Marietta Street.
New Residence Hall
The first new residence hall on campus since 2005, this new facility for first-year students will be on the west side of campus along Northside Drive between Eighth and Ninth streets. The 191,000-square-foot building will contain approximately 860 beds with rooms configured for double occupancy and the flexibility to customize or rearrange the in-room furniture layout. Each bedroom will have individualized climate control. Student support areas will include collaborative learning spaces, community lounges, and group kitchens. Completion is slated for August 2026.
Read more here.
Howell and Smith Residence Halls Renovation
Howell and Smith residence halls will be renovated to meet current housing needs and expectations. Plans are to update building systems as well as interior spaces. A new connecting structure will join the two halls, creating a central entry point. Improvements also include additional study spaces and student gathering areas.
Westside Community Connector Pedestrian Bridge
A pedestrian and micromobility bridge, envisioned by
Georgia Tech students in a joint Civil and Architecture design studio , will cross the CSX and Norfolk Southern freight rail corridor to connect the heart of campus with Science Square, Arts Square, Westside communities, and the recently completed Westside Connector of the Atlanta BeltLine. Concept design will begin this summer. Pending full funding and successful coordination with district partners, construction could start as early as 2026.
Additional Media
Artist rendering (subject to change) of the Student Athlete Performance Center.
Related links
Infrastructure and Sustainability
Contact
Cathy Brim
Communications Officer II
Infrastructure and Sustainability
Email
cathy.brim@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000