What's on the Horizon for 2023?
Members of the Tech community share their plans for the new year.
Jan 13, 2023
The new year is often a time of reflection and planning. With this in mind, we asked several members of the Georgia Tech community to share what they are looking forward to — personally or professionally — in 2023.
“My
lab moved to Cherry Emerson
late last year. So, this year I am looking forward to hallway conversations with my new neighbors, and I am hoping to strike up some new collaborations at the interface between biophysics, microbiology, and evolutionary biology.”
—Peter Yunker, associate professor, School of Physics
“I’m looking forward to shaping a more fulfilling and engaging employee experience at Georgia Tech. In Human Resources, we’ve been working tirelessly to develop programs and practices that will help Tech recruit, support and develop our talented workforce. I’m excited for faculty and staff to experience positive culture shifts and hope we inspire enthusiasm as we share and celebrate the deep love that exists for working at Tech.”
—Skye Duckett, vice president and chief human resources officer, Georgia Tech Human Resources
“Personally, I am looking forward to spending more time with my wife, Amanda, and our dog, Buzz, at our family place on the coast. I'm also looking forward to watching my fellow 2001 alumnus, Coach Brent Key, lead our Yellow Jackets this fall!”
—William Smith, director, Office of Emergency Management and Communications
“I am very much looking forward to taking the
Cultivate Well-Being strategic focus
to the next level as we are able to start planning and implementation in earnest, guided by our roadmap. I am also excited about the prospect of enhancing our efforts to promote student belonging and facilitate student success as we launch the new
John Lewis Student Leadership Pathways
and move toward making the Black cultural center a reality. I am also planning to visit the Georgia Tech-Europe campus for the first time! On the personal front, I can’t wait for Season 7 of
Outlander
(Starz) or Season 2 of
Shadow and Bone
(Netflix). I also get to celebrate my blue point Siamese kitten turning one year old in February.”
—Luoluo Hong, vice president for Student Engagement and Well-Being
“I am looking forward to all that 2023 has to offer me personally. I am the one who’s usually immersed in my professional career and family and friends. However, this year, it’s all about me, and accomplishing some of the personal goals that I’ve set for myself. So, I am excited and looking forward to the completion of my first children’s book series. I have been working on it for a few years and it’s finally coming together. It will be released in August 2023.”
—Quinae’ A. Ford, administrative manager, GTRI Project Management Office
“The Georgia Tech Alumni Association has named this the Year of Engagement. I am excited about connecting with even more alumni and inviting them to gather on campus and with Yellow Jackets in their community, to grow together with our professional education programs, and to give back to each other and the Institute. We are closing in on 200,000 living alumni this year, so we are grateful for the partnerships we enjoy across campus to help us reach our vast constituency. We are striving to build an Alumni Association that is with our alumni in 2023 and
for a lifetime . Go Jackets!”
—Dene Sheheane, MGT 1991, president of the Georgia Tech Alumni Association
Contact
Victor Rogers
Institute Communications
Email
victor.rogers@comm.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000