Winter Student Organizations Fair
This February, the Winter Student Organizations Fair will feature 140 of Georgia Tech’s Registered Student Organizations and provide an easy way for interested students to connect with activities on-campus.
Jan 31, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
This February, the Winter Student Organizations Fair will feature 140 of Georgia Tech’s Registered Student Organizations and provide an easy way for interested students to connect with activities on campus. Visit
the Winter Organizations Fair event on Engage
to RSVP and learn more.
Students can look forward to two days of organization tabling for the Winter Fair. Both days of the fair will take place from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. on Tech Walkway. Each day will have about 70 organizations broken into categories:
Wednesday, Feb. 9
Academic, Arts, Competitive, Competitive Sports, Greek organizations, and Honor Societies
Thursday, Feb. 10
Civic Engagement, Cultural, Recreation, and Religious/Spiritual
Download the CORQ App  and present it at the Student Engagement Tent during Winter Org Fair to receive free hot cocoa and a cookie!
If you're looking for a particular organization,  check out this link to see which organizations are tabling and on which date .
Studies have shown that students who are involved on campus have higher success in the classroom and post graduation, and are ultimately more satisfied with their undergraduate experience than peers who aren’t involved in an organization or other activity outside the classroom.
It can be overwhelming to get started. Here are a few tips for students about getting involved and participating in the Winter Org Fair:
Try something new. College is all about new experiences. With hundreds of organizations on campus, you can step out of your comfort zone and join something you may not have previously tried.
Don’t overwhelm yourself. Don’t try to join every single organization you come across. Find the ones that you are genuinely passionate about and go from there.
It’s never too late to get involved. You don’t have to be in your first year or first semester to get involved. If you didn’t get as involved your first couple years at Tech, jump in now.
It doesn’t have to be hard. Be adventurous — go to the Org Fair, go to open club meetings, and use the resources that Tech provides. If you need support finding a place to start, you can always reach out to the
Center for Student Engagement
for advice.
Contact
Sara Warner
Student Engagement & Well-Being
sara.warner@studentlife.gatech.edu
Email
Quinn.foster@studentlife.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000