A Wish Come True for Sammie
An Atlanta 12-year-old living with a rare disorder becomes an honorary Yellow Jacket.
Together with the organization Dream On 3, Georgia Tech student-athletes and coaches wanted to make sure Sammie Padgett, a girl with a life-altering chromosome condition, had a weekend she would never forget — so they welcomed her to campus for Homecoming.
Oct 12, 2022
— Atlanta, GA
A very special 12-year-old from our community suited up and hit the field with Georgia Tech’s student-athletes for Homecoming weekend.
Sammie was born with a rare chromosomal disorder that makes her prone to seizures and has affected her development. This often left her feeling isolated and excluded, but she’s found joy through sports and competing in the Special Olympics. She is a huge softball and volleyball fan, and, as it turns out, also a big fan of the Yellow Jackets.
Together with the organization
Dream On 3 , Georgia Tech student-athletes and coaches wanted to make sure Sammie had a weekend she would never forget — so they welcomed her to campus for Homecoming.
Sammie’s weekend started with the
Tech softball
team. She took part in practice and warmups with the players. Then it was on to visit with the nationally ranked
Georgia Tech volleyball
team, and Sammie got to hang out in the locker room before the Jackets played the University of Virginia.
Homecoming weekend at Georgia Tech wouldn’t be complete without a visit to Bobby Dodd Stadium. Sammie was fitted for her own cheerleading uniform, and joined the
cheer team
for the pregame traditions in Yellow Jacket Alley before being recognized on the field — where the
football
team brought home a victory against Duke.
“I cannot say enough great things about the Athletics staff that we worked with at Georgia Tech to make Sammie’s dream experience so memorable,” said Amelia White, volunteer and operations manager for Dream On 3. “Each team each took the time to speak with Sammie and spend quality time with her. They all provided Sammie and her family with a lifetime of memories.”
Learn more about Dream On 3 and their mission to help create memorable experiences for children with life-altering health conditions here .
Additional Images
Contact
Steven Norris
Institute Communications
Georgia Tech
Email
snorris@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
North Avenue Atlanta, GA 30332
+1 404.894.2000