100 students, faculty, and staff tour civil rights sites in the nation’s capital during mlk weekend 
 during the weekend commemorating the life and inspiration of dr. martin luther king jr., 76 students and 24 faculty and staff from georgia tech traveled to washington, d.c., to tour several civil rights sites. 
 alexander pegues, undergraduate student in the george w. woodruff school of mechanical engineering, at the washington monument 
 jan 30, 2017 
 — atlanta, ga 
 during the weekend commemorating the life and inspiration of dr. martin luther king jr., 76 students and 24 faculty and staff from georgia tech traveled to washington, d.c., to tour several civil rights sites. this tour is part of the institute’s mlk celebration, an ambitious slate of educational programs, arts and cultural performances, and service opportunities to encourage active participation from the campus and atlanta community. 
 students, faculty, and staff departed in charter buses on the night of january 12 to visit museums and memorials over the next two days, including the national museum of african american history and culture, the king memorial, national mall, national museum of the american indian, and the united states holocaust memorial museum. 
 associate dean of students and director of student diversity programs stephanie ray reflected on why georgia tech’s mlk student board organized the civil rights tour in d.c.: “we followed the life of dr. king. after leading civil rights trips in montgomery, ala. in 2012 and birmingham, ala. in 2013, the next goal was to end our tour by visiting the king memorial and national museum of african american history and culture in our nation’s capital.” 
 here is what student participants said about their experiences during the civil rights tour: 
 why did you want to go on this trip? 
 “i wanted to experience the history and culture of africans before being brought to america. i also wanted to learn more about the native american culture beyond what is presented in history books.” 
 – 
 alexander pegues, undergraduate student in the george w. woodruff school of mechanical engineering 
 what was your favorite part of this trip? 
 “the national museum of african american history and culture, hands down. from the photos to the interactive learning, it was beautifully designed and presented. the experience was more than you could imagine.” 
 – 
 khadijah boles, undergraduate student in the wallace h. coulter department of biomedical engineering 
 what have you learned from this experience that you could apply in your daily life? 
 “for us, as a people, to progress, we need to come together as one. we also need to make education available to everyone, especially our youth. i plan to start programs for youth that i didn’t have in school but was blessed to have family who taught me.” 
 – 
 khadijah boles, undergraduate student in the wallace h. coulter department of biomedical engineering 
 “i saw the triumph of the human spirit over oppression. i apply that triumph to my own daily small victories.” 
 – 
 tj funso, undergraduate student in the h. milton stewart school of industrial & systems engineering 
 school of earth and atmospheric sciences assistant professor jennifer glass also shared her experiences on the civil rights tour at 
 www.storify.com / jenniglass / gt-civil-rights-tour-of-dc . 
 this year’s tour was sponsored by the college of engineering, college of sciences, department of housing, division of student life, institute diversity, lgbtqia resource center, office of student diversity programs, and parent’s fund for student life and leadership. to learn more about the civil rights tour and georgia tech’s mlk celebration, visit 
 www.diversity.gatech.edu / mlk-celebration . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 annette filliat 
 communications manager 
 institute diversity 
 annette.filliat@gatech.edu 
 email 
 annette.filliat@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000