12 georgia tech faculty members receive regents recognition 
 the university system of georgia (usg) board of regents (bor) appointed 12 georgia tech faculty members to regents professors and regents researchers. 
 regents professors and regents researchers, top row (l-r): amy bruckman, john cressler, greg gibson, david gottfried, ajay kohli, and tim lieuwen. bottom row (l-r): glenn parker, michael rodgers, catherine ross, david sherrill, gregory showman, and john stasko. 
 aug 17, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the university system of georgia (usg) board of regents (bor) appointed 12 georgia tech faculty members to regents professors and regents researchers. 
 reappointments to the title of regents professor are: 
 john stasko , professor in the college of computing 
 catherine ross , harry west professor of city and regional planning in the college of design and adjunct professor in the school of civil and environmental engineering 
 timothy lieuwen , david s. lewis jr. chair in the daniel guggenheim school of aerospace engineering and adjunct professor in the george w. woodruff school of mechanical engineering 
 ajay kohli , gary t. and elizabeth r. jones chair in management in the ernest j. scheller jr. college of business 
 appointments to the title of regents professor are: 
 amy bruckman , professor in the college of computing 
 john cressler , schlumberger chair in electronics in the college of engineering 
 gregory gibson , tom and marie patton chair in the college of sciences 
 charles david sherrill , professor in the college of computing and the college of sciences 
 appointments to the title of regents researcher are: 
 david gottfried , principal research scientist and senior assistant director of the institute for electronics and nanotechnology 
 glenn parker , principal research engineer and associate director of the applied systems laboratory in the georgia tech research institute (gtri) 
 gregory showman , principal research engineer and gtri fellow, sensors and electromagnetic applications laboratory 
 and one reappointment to the title of regents researcher: 
 michael rodgers , principal research scientist in the college of engineering 
 “it was a pleasure to nominate these outstanding faculty members for recognition by the board of regents,” said steven w. mclaughlin, provost and executive vice president for academic affairs. “i'd like to congratulate and thank each of them for their exemplary leadership and service, commitment to excellence in research and scholarship, and dedication to the education, growth, and well-being of our students.” 
 each year, the college deans may nominate two academic faculty members for the regents professor title and one research faculty member for the regents researcher title. gtri may nominate two research faculty members for regents researcher. the titles are awarded upon approval of the usg chancellor and its committee on academic affairs only with unanimous recommendation of the institute regents professor and researcher selection committee, the institute’s president, the executive vice president for research, and the provost and executive vice president for academic affairs. 
 the bor approved the nominations on aug. 10. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 victor rogers 
 institute communications 
 email 
 victor.rogers@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000