19 tech faculty receive regents' distinctions 
 board of regents' distinctions honor the recipients for their outstanding contributions and excellence. 
 apr 25, 2024 
 the university system of georgia's board of regents has honored 19 georgia tech faculty members with 2024 regents' distinctions. these accolades recognize the recipients’ outstanding contributions and excellence in education, research, and innovation. 
 “these amazing colleagues exemplify the spirit of excellence and dedication that defines georgia tech's faculty,” said 
 steve mclaughlin , provost and executive vice president for academic affairs. “their contributions not only advance knowledge within their respective fields but also positively impact our community at large. working alongside these faculty members is an honor and inspires me every day.” 
 georgia tech faculty named as regents’ professors include: 
 amy bruckman 
 (renewal), senior associate chair, school of interactive computing, college of computing 
 john cressler 
 (renewal), schlumberger chair in electronics, school of electrical and computer engineering, college of engineering 
 greg gibson 
 (renewal), tom and marie patton chair in biological sciences and director of the center for integrative genomics, school of biological sciences, college of sciences 
 thomas kurfess , professor and husco / ramirez distinguished chair in fluid power and motion control, george w. woodruff school of mechanical engineering, college of engineering 
 wenke lee , professor and john p. imlay jr. chair in software, school of computer science and school of cybersecurity and privacy, college of computing 
 brian magerko , professor and director of graduate studies in digital media, head of the expressive machinery lab, school of literature, media, and communication, ivan allen college of liberal arts 
 patricia mokhtarian , clifford and william greene jr. professor, school of civil and environmental engineering, college of engineering 
 charles david sherrill 
 (renewal), professor, school of chemistry and biochemistry, college of sciences and associate director for research and education, institute for data engineering and science 
 georgia tech faculty named as regents’ researchers include: 
 david gottfried 
 (renewal), senior assistant director and principal research scientist, institute for electronics and nanotechnology, college of engineering 
 gregory showman 
 (renewal), fellow and principal research engineer, sensors and electromagnetic applications laboratory, gtri 
 jeffrey sitterle , principal research scientist and chief innovation officer, information and cyber sciences directorate, gtri 
 leanne west , chief engineer of pediatric technology and principal research scientist, georgia tech pediatric innovation network 
 jie xu , head of chemical and biological systems branch and principal research scientist, gtri 
 david zurn , test engineering division chief and principal research scientist, gtri 
 georgia tech faculty named as regents’ entrepreneurs include: 
 mustaque ahamad , professor, school of computer science and school of cybersecurity and privacy, college of computing 
 omer inan , professor and linda j. and mark c. smith chair, school of electrical and computer engineering, college of engineering 
 rampi ramprasad , professor and michael e. tennenbaum family chair, georgia research alliance eminent scholar in energy sustainability, school of materials science and engineering, college of engineering 
 georgia tech faculty named as regents’ innovators include: 
 alexander alexeev , professor and joseph anderer faculty fellow, george w. woodruff school of mechanical engineering, college of engineering 
 georgia tech faculty named to the georgia mining association early career professorship: 
 sheng dai , associate professor and group coordinator in geosystems engineering, school of civil and environmental engineering, college of engineering 
 writer: brittany aiello, faculty communications program manager, organizational and academic communications, institute communications 
 contact 
 office of the provost 
 email 
 provostsoffice@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000