2021 techtimonials speakers needed 
 faculty and staff are encouraged to share their inspirational stories in this ted talk inspired event. 
 oct 07, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 techtimonials:   employees’ perspectives on wellness, careers, and ways they’ve found community at georgia tech 
 georgia tech human resources and members of the employee engagement leadership council are looking for speakers to participate in the third session of  techtimonials , a ted talks-inspired virtual event held in december. join us as colleagues share their best practices on employee engagement, health and well-being, career advancement, and inspirational interests. 
 we’re looking for georgia tech employees to share a five-minute “testimony” or story relating to the following categories: 
 employee engagement – we all have different reasons why we enjoy working at georgia tech and experiences that have cemented our sense of belonging. we invite colleagues to tell us about a program or initiative that you or your department started, or one you participated in, that increased your sense of engagement here. 
 health and well-being – focusing on your health and taking time for yourself is an important component to ensuring we are motivated and engaged in our work. we invite colleagues to tell us how you find time to take care of yourself. 
 career discovery / advancement – at georgia tech, many employees strive to grow and enhance their careers. we invite colleagues who have navigated unique career paths and who have found strategies that have promoted their career growth to share their experiences with our community. 
 inspirational interests / talents – at georgia tech, we are a community of talented individuals who have many personal interests and wide-ranging expertise. we invite colleagues to share some of your talents with our community to foster informal connections and increase learning opportunities in fields outside of their professional arena. 
 testimonies should not exceed five minutes in length and should only consist of the individual’s talking presentation (no supplemental a / v is required). a moderator will host the event and quickly introduce each individual by name and title of presentation. we will not host a formal q&a session after each testimony; however, we invite you to include resources and supplemental materials, if you’d like. if you missed our first techtimonial, please visit our recording on mediaspace –  techtimonials, thursday, may 28, 2020 
 if interested in participating, 
 please complete this form  by friday, oct. 15. final confirmations will be sent to participants by friday, oct. 22. speakers are expected to participate in a video conference rehearsal prior to the event (date tbd: mid-november). 
 techtimonials intake form  – apply by friday, oct. 15. 
 contact 
 laura pusateri 
 employee engagement manager laurapusateri@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000