2021 annual compliance training coming soon 
 you must complete all four of the compliance training modules between oct. 25 and nov. 19. 
 oct 15, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the 2021 annual compliance training will help define 
 living our values 
 at georgia tech, reinforce the university system of georgia (usg) ethical standards and cybersecurity requirements, and remind us all about the importance of research integrity, reporting external activities, and navigating foreign influence. 
 new this year, the annual compliance training will take place in the fall to coincide with 
 ethics awareness week . faculty, staff (including tech temps), and student employees hired prior to oct. 1, 2021, are required to complete this year’s four training modules: 
 usg ethics training 
 information security / cybersecurity training 
 georgia tech foreign influence, research integrity, and conflict of interest training 
 conflict of interest attestation 
 you must complete all four of the compliance training modules between oct. 25 and nov. 19. employees who do not fully complete the requirements by midnight on nov. 19 may receive a formal disciplinary notice from the institute. 
 the annual compliance training can be completed on a desktop or laptop. it should take approximately 45 minutes, and it does not have to be completed at one time. 
 for more information on the 2021 annual compliance training, including helpful resources, visit 
 hr.gatech.edu / integrity-and-compliance . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 terry bridges, ccep 
 georgia tech office of ethics and compliance terry.bridges@gtri.gatech.edu 
 additional information 
 the conflict of interest office has a new disclosure system coming online beginning october 25. the new system has been streamlined to facilitate how you submit information on your external activities. you can now specify your disclosure type, provide information easily, and communicate with the conflict of interest team directly through the application. it now also allows you to upload documentation. 
 visit 
 servicenow disclosure 
 to submit your disclosures. 
 if you have any questions, email 
 coi@gatech.edu . 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000