2021-22 emerging leaders program cohort selected 
 the sixth cohort of georgia tech’s emerging leaders program has been selected. 
 tech tower 
 jun 24, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the sixth cohort of georgia tech’s emerging leaders program has been selected. starting in fall 2021 and continuing through spring 2022, participants will take part in a number of leadership development activities, including a fall weekend workshop, monthly workshops, small-group work, and a 360-degree assessment. 
 “i’m excited to welcome the sixth cohort of the emerging leaders program,” said steven w. mclaughlin, provost and executive vice president for academic affairs. “the program supports faculty invested in pursuing their leadership journey, which benefits the institute’s strategic plan goals and the georgia tech community as a whole.” 
 the sixth cohort reflects many of georgia tech’s schools and colleges. 
 college of design 
 young mi choi , associate professor and associate chair, school of industrial design 
 ivan allen college of liberal arts 
 justin b. biddle , associate professor, school of public policy 
 jenna jordan , associate professor and director of graduate studies, sam nunn school of international affairs 
 usha nair-reichert , associate professor and director of master’s programs, school of economics 
 college of sciences 
 andrew newman , professor, school of earth and atmospheric sciences 
 zhigang peng , professor, school of earth and atmospheric sciences 
 chandra raman , professor, school of physics 
 college of engineering 
 chloé arson , associate professor, school of civil and environmental engineering 
 lakshmi prasad dasi , rozelle vanda wesley professor and professor, wallace h. coulter department of biomedical engineering 
 elliot moore ii , associate professor and associate chair for undergraduate affairs, school of electrical and computer engineering 
 kamran paynabar , fouts family early career professor and associate professor, h. milton stewart school of industrial and systems engineering 
 mary lynn realff , associate professor and associate chair for undergraduate programs, school of materials science and engineering 
 julian j. rimoli , pratt & whitney professor and associate professor, daniel guggenheim school of aerospace engineering 
 iris tien , williams family early career professor and associate professor, school of civil and environmental engineering 
 may dongmei wang , professor, wallace h. coulter department of biomedical engineering 
 shannon yee , associate professor, george w. woodruff school of mechanical engineering 
 the emerging leaders program started in 2016 and is designed for associate and full professors who have attained tenure. the program is a collaboration between the office of the provost, the office of the executive vice president for research, the institute for leadership and social impact, and the office of graduate education and faculty development. 
 learn more about the emerging leaders program. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 office of the provost 
 provostsoffice@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000