5 ways to make the most out of a career fair 
 with the spring all majors career fair taking place jan. 22–23, students should be making preparations for the event and to talk with prospective employers. 
 career fair 
 jan 18, 2024 
 with the 
 spring all majors career fair 
 taking place jan. 2 2 
 – 
 23 , students should be making preparations for the event and 
 to talk 
 with prospective employers. 
 the first step to attending the event is to 
 register through 
 careerbuzz , though walk-up attendance 
 is 
 also 
 pe rmitted . 
 a few 
 tips 
 for 
 students 
 to be prepared: 
 attend the fair . this may seem obvious, but not every student does. 
 the event offers networking opportunities for students of all majors. 
 if you get there and talk to an employer who is looking for engineering students and 
 you're 
 a liberal arts or sciences major, ask if they have colleagues you could contact about opportunities in other areas of their business. 
 practice . most students 
 know 
 to practice for an interview, but not a fai r. preparing 
 a 20- to 30-second “elevator pitch” that briefly captures who you are, what you offer, and what 
 you’re 
 looking for 
 can help you feel confident when you talk with recruiters . practice delivering a smooth elevator pitch, giving a firm handshake, and making good eye contact. 
 plan your strategy . to make the most of your time at the fair, 
 review 
 the company list to know who will be there and 
 identify 
 priority employers to target. look online at 
 the list of employers attending the fair 
 to see which companies you want to talk with and look up background information on those employers. 
 get — and stay — organized .  have 
 a plan for how to keep everything organized as you get materials during the fair. you 
 may 
 walk out with a lot of business cards and handouts, and it can be overwhelming . 
 take only the information you 
 need, and 
 make notes on the back of business cards or on your phone to remember key discussion points for when you follow up after the fair. 
 follow up . if recruiters instruct you to apply on 
 careerbuzz 
 after the fair, be sure to do so promptly. also, many recruiters use linkedin as a resource for filling positions, and students should be visible and active there. 
 students should c onnect on linkedin with anyone they 
 spoke to 
 at the fair. even if the request 
 isn’t 
 accepted, students will have gotten their names in front of the recruiter one more time. the request should be paired with a follow-up email as well. 
 attending 
 the fair is about more than just employment. 
 coming out with a solid lead is a great goal, but 
 it’s 
 also about 
 networking and the 
 experience 
 of 
 participating 
 in the fair . 
 learn more about how to prepare for the fair . 
 the 
 spring all majors career fair 
 takes place jan. 2 2 
 – 
 2 3 
 in the 
 exhibition hall, from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. each day . students should wear professional business attire and bring their 
 buzzcard 
 and several copies of their 
 resume. students can 
 register to attend the fair through 
 careerbuzz  for priority access. walk-up attendance is also welcome. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 spring 2024 all majors career fair 
 georgia tech career fairs 
 georgia tech career center 
 contact 
 kristen bailey 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000