77 student teams amaze judges at the 2021 k-12 inventure prize state finals 
 the 2021 k-12 inventure prize competition welcomed 77 participating teams to present their unique projects and design-based solutions. 
 may 03, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 on thursday, march 11th, 2021, ceismc hosted the georgia tech k-12 inventure prize state finals online. the inventure prize competition encourages elementary, middle, and high school students to present projects that identify real-world problems and design unique solutions. 
 this year, 77 teams participated in the competition from all across georgia and 70 judges participated with live video pitches and a q&a. on thursday, students presented their projects to the judges and the projects were then evaluated based on criteria such as practicality, creativity, marketability and design-based thinking. each team had their own judging rooms where judges could join in and out of to review all the teams. the synchronous virtual setting allowed for students to receive feedback in real time. 
 “the students and teachers were absolutely thrilled,” said jasmine patel, ceismc research associate, “they loved that they were able to keep the interaction with the judges and to pitch them 'shark tank' style.” 
 on wednesday, march 17th, the award ceremony followed the event and included keynote speaker, marques colston. colston is a former nfl super bowl champion, and he is now an entrepreneur and venture capitalist. the keynote incorporated a pre-recorded inspirational message about colston’s career experience and the hardships he had to overcome. colton then followed up with a 20-minute live q&a. 
 “[students] asked amazing questions like: what made you want to become an entrepreneur? what other hardships did you face? did you encounter racism throughout your career, and how did you overcome that?” said patel. 
 following the keynote, the award ceremony announced the advancement of 38 students to the national invention convention & entrepreneurship expo (nicee) competition that will be held virtually this summer. 
 first-place winners from this year's k-12 inventure prize competition included team "yumshies" from east side elementary school, team "r.e.c.y.c.l.e." from mount bethel elementary school, team "tech blizzard" from malcolm bridge middle school, and team “organization of students for innovation” from alan c. pope high school. 
 “the students this year had outstanding inventions!” said patel. “the qualifying students have been notified that they are eligible to participate and will be working on perfecting their video, invention, and poster board.” 
 congratulations to the k-12 inventure prize winners who will be moving on to the national competition: 
 first place k-2 division 
 team: yumshies 
 school: east side elementary school 
 students: arya menon 
 teacher: patricia morrison 
 second place k-2 division 
 team: write on 
 school: kennesaw elementary school 
 students: aahana butani, penny mcdonald, and helen morgan 
 teacher: dr. valerie king 
 third place k-2 division 
 team: candy dispenser timer 
 school: dunwoody elementary school 
 students: atharva jethlia 
 teacher: stacy mandel 
 first place elementary school division 
 team: r.e.c.y.c.l.e. 
 school: mount bethel elementary school 
 students: zoe diaz, dylan merrill, and mia rhea 
 teacher: melissa danner 
 second place elementary school division 
 team: turtle-pellant 
 school: east side elementary school 
 students: harper mcginnis 
 teacher: amy murray 
 third place elementary school division 
 team: handicap heroes 
 school: sharp creek elementary school 
 students: corey dollar, ahkil williams, and kennedy cross 
 teacher: anna ellis 
 first place middle school division 
 team: tech blizzard 
 school: malcolm bridge middle school 
 students: sam seward and luke eley 
 teacher: carolyn freeman 
 second place middle school division 
 team: keywise 
 school: malcolm bridge middle school 
 students: jack horn and ethan poole 
 teacher: carolyn freeman 
 third place middle school division 
 team: the novid 
 school: temple middle school 
 students: mac pannell, austin speer, and mason shepherd 
 teacher: adam scurr 
 first place high school division 
 team: organization of students for innovation 
 school: alan c. pope high school 
 students: armon mighani, patrick astorga, and tate smith 
 teacher: col stephen williams 
 second place high school division 
 team: my skin app 
 school: denmark high school 
 students: ameya jadhav and sameer balhara 
 teacher: phil kinneer 
 third place tie high school division 
 team: litpad 
 school: north oconee high school 
 students: michelle li, barnabas li, and tianjie lu 
 teacher: jackson huckaby 
 third place tie high school division 
 team: a mechanism to decrease rotational falls in equestrian eventing 
 school: harrison high school 
 students: liesel fazekas 
 teacher: paulette allard 
 ironcad award 
 team: the toilet paper grab bar 
 school: atlanta international school 
 students: nicky rea, jordon rolley, and aj bohanon 
 teacher: neill ford 
 manufacturing award 
 team: litpad 
 school: north oconee high school 
 students: michelle li, barnabas li, and tianjie lu 
 teacher: jackson huckaby 
 health and medical technology award 
 team: organization of students for innovation 
 school: alan c. pope high school 
 students: armon mighani, patrick astorga, and tate smith 
 teacher: col stephen williams 
 sustainability and energy award 
 team: eco-orbs 
 school: walton high school 
 students: cindy chen and piper pearson 
 teacher: amanda edwards 
 consumer goods award 
 team: whole otter love 
 school: kennesaw elementary school 
 students: sami nichols, aryan pour, and harper dunkerly 
 teacher: dr. valerie king 
 third grade honorable mention 
 team: kids face mask vending machine 
 school: dunwoody elementary school 
 students: vikrant ravi and dhwanil dalal 
 teacher: stacy mendel 
 by: shannon malone – ceismc communications 
 additional images 
 related links 
 k12 inventure prize website 
 ceismc 
 email 
 k12inventure@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000