abdallah to testify at congressional hearing on u.s. competitiveness in critical technologies 
 chaouki t. abdallah will testify jan. 29 before a u.s. house committee about the cooperative united states research enterprise and the threat of falling behind other nations in critical technologies. 
 chaouki abdallah is georgia tech's executive vice president for research. he's shown in the marcus nanotechnology buildling. (credit: rob felt, georgia tech) 
 jan 28, 2020 
 — atlanta, ga 
 chaouki t. abdallah will testify jan. 29 before a u.s. house committee about the cooperative united states research enterprise and the threat of falling behind other nations in critical technologies. 
 abdallah, georgia tech’s executive vice president for research, will speak to lawmakers on the committee on science, space, and technology in a hearing titled “losing ground: u.s. competitiveness in critical technologies.” the hearing will bring together expert testimony from individuals representing federal, industry, and academic perspectives about artificial intelligence, cybersecurity, next generation wireless, quantum information systems, advanced manufacturing and materials, bioscience and engineering, and many others. 
 “i am proud to represent georgia tech and be the voice of universities in these important discussions about the economic and security issues that affect the future of research and development in the united states,” said abdallah. 
 he will be joined by diane souvaine, chair of the national science board (nsb), and eric schmidt, founder of schmidt futures. 
 the hearing will begin at 10 a.m. est. to watch the full hearing, visit the 
 committee on science, space, and technology 
 website. 
 about the committee on science, space, and technology: 
 the committee on science, space, and technology has jurisdiction over much of the nondefense federal research and development (r&d) portfolio. it has exclusive jurisdiction over the national aeronautics and space administration (nasa), the national science foundation (nsf), the national institute of standards and technology (nist), and the white house office of science and technology policy (ostp). the committee also has authority over r&d activities at the department of energy (doe), the environmental protection agency (epa), the department of transportation (dot), the federal aviation administration (faa), the national oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa), the national weather service (nws), and the department of homeland security (dhs). 
 additional images 
 contact 
 susie ivy 
 director, institute research and provost communications 
 404-385-3782 
 email 
 susie.ivy@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000