administrative services center expands its scope 
 this summer, the administrative services center has welcomed several new teams into its portfolio as it continues to position itself as the one-stop shop for high-volume, administrative services. 
 jun 30, 2023 
 this summer, the administrative services center (asc) has welcomed several new teams into its portfolio as it continues to position itself as the one-stop shop for high-volume, administrative services while assisting in retooling resources for an improved user experience. recently added teams include audio visual, directory services, and technology support services (formerly the enterprise services desk). ​ 
 gtri’s recruiting team was also integrated into the asc in alignment with 
 tech’s overarching people-focused strategy 
 to provide consistent hr services that support growth across all areas of the institute.​ 
 employees can now contact the asc for these services, where they will be greeted by a knowledgeable agent who will assist them with their question or issue. ​ 
 contact the asc 
 1. you can navigate to the asc portal at 
 asc.gatech.edu  to do the following: 
 search for answers to your hr or it questions 
 submit a service request or general help request 
 schedule a walk-in appointment 
 2. you can also call the asc at 
 404.385.1111 
 monday through friday 
 hr and directory services: 8 a.m. – 5 p.m. 
 tech support services: 8 a.m. – 6 p.m. 
 audio visual services: 8 a.m. – 9 p.m. 
 3. you can even walk-in for an appointment monday through friday 
 hr support at 500 tech parkway: 8 a.m. – 5 p.m. 
 tech support services at clough undergraduate learning commons: 8 a.m. – 6 p.m. 
 you are invited to explore the asc at  asc.gatech.edu . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 administrative services center 
 administrative excellence 
 delivering better administrative services to support the growing needs of campus 
 contact 
 rachael pocklington 
 institute communications 
 email 
 rpocklington@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000