admission delivers early action 2 decisions 
 another record-breaking number of applicants, with increased applications for all six of georgia tech’s colleges. 
 the number of applications increased for all six of georgia tech's colleges. 
 jan 30, 2023 
 — atlanta, ga 
 more than 27,000 students from outside of georgia who applied to georgia tech in early action 2 received their admission decisions on friday evening. beginning with the 2021 admission cycle, first-year applicants could select from one of three admission plans: early action 1, early action 2, and regular decision. 
 the overall admit rate for early action 2, which included both international and out-of-state students, was 10%. the 2,838 students admitted this round hail from 48 states (plus the district of columbia and puerto rico), 79 countries, and 1,807 high schools from around the globe. these students join 2,590 early action 1 applicants from georgia who were 
 admitted in december . 
 early action 2 is the largest round by number of applications. this year a record number of students — 52,330 — applied for the first-year class entering in the summer and fall terms of 2023, an increase of 3.5% for all three rounds (early action 1, early action 2, and regular decision). applications increased in all six of georgia tech’s colleges. 
 “our team of full- and part-time readers, along with our operations team, have worked tirelessly to ensure each application was reviewed holistically,” said mary tipton woolley, senior associate director of 
 undergraduate admission . “the students who apply to georgia tech continue to amaze me with their accomplishments in high school, and i want to encourage all on campus to help them choose georgia tech in the coming months.” 
 campus visits and outreach opportunities are already underway for all admitted students. more information is available on the 
 campus visits page . 
 students who applied in regular decision or were deferred from early action 1 or 2 will receive their admission decision in march. admission expects to admit approximately 3,000 students in regular decision. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 undergraduate admission 
 contact 
 victor rogers 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000