alex orso named interim dean of college of computing 
 alex orso, professor and associate dean, has been appointed interim dean of the college of computing, effective aug. 1. 
 alex orso is pictured standing in his office on the georgia tech campus. he will assume the role of interim dean of the college of computing, effective aug. 1. 
 may 15, 2023 
 alex orso, 
 professor 
 and 
 a ssociate 
 dean , 
 has been appointed interim dean of the college of computing, effective aug. 1. dean charles isbell, who served 
 since 2019, has been named the new provost of the university of wis c onsin-madison. 
 during 
 orso’s 
 23 years at 
 georgia 
 tech, he 
 has 
 established 
 himself as a leading expert in software 
 engineering , with emphasis on software testing and program analysis . h is research has improve d 
 software reliability, security, and trustworthiness. 
 he is the recipient of four research impact awards, and his research has been funded by government agencies such as 
 the 
 defense advanced research projects agency , 
 th e 
 d epartment of 
 h omeland 
 s ecurity , 
 the 
 n ational 
 s cience 
 f oundation , and 
 the 
 o ffice of 
 n aval 
 r esearch , as well as industry collaborators including fujitsu labs, google, ibm, and microsoft. 
 orso is also 
 a distinguished 
 member of the 
 association for computing machinery 
 and an 
 institute of electrical and electronics engineers 
 f e l l o w . 
 in 2021, he was instrumental in 
 securing $11 million in funding 
 for the creation of the scientific software engineering center, of which he was named the 
 co-founder and 
 inaugural director. the center, which is part of 
 schmidt 
 futures' 
 virtual institute for scientific software initiative, will develop new methodologies for im proving high-performance scientific software and train ing 
 tomorrow’s software engineers. 
 beyond the impact of his research, orso is known for his dedication in the classroom. 
 popular among on-campus students and beloved by students in the online master of science in computer science (omscs) program, he is 
 considered 
 one of the original advocates 
 of 
 the omscs program. he continues to teach 
 the virtual software development process course for the online master ’ s students 
 — 
 a course that he 
 created and 
 first taught in 2014 when the lauded degree program launched. 
 from 
 2015 
 to 2017 , he was 
 a ssociate 
 s chool 
 c hair in the school of computer science , and he was appointed associate dean in the college of computing in 2020 . he has embraced his leadership role on campus and , 
 in 2021 , 
 was elected a 
 faculty executive leadership academy fellow . 
 “we are grateful to alex for his willingness to step into the role of interim dean,” said steven w. mclaughlin, 
 provost 
 and executive vice president for academic affairs. “alex is a dedicated, steadfast member of the computing community, and the college of computing could not be in better hands during this period of transition.” 
 orso will serve until a new dean is named. an external firm will be 
 identified 
 to lead a national search , 
 and a campus search committee will also be formed through nominations. committee nominations can be 
 submitted 
 through the 
 nomination form , which will remain open through may 26. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 alex orso faculty profile 
 search committee nomination form 
 contact 
 brittany aiello 
 faculty communications program manager 
 organizational, academic, and research communications 
 email 
 brittany.aiello@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000