amazon robotics gift supports georgia tech’s advanced technology development center 
 funding will go toward assisting diverse entrepreneurs in the fields of robotics and automation. 
 atdc director john avery (left) and thomas felis, director of robotics strategy for amazon global robotics. (photo: peralte c. paul) 
 jun 14, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 to help support the growth of startups and individuals working to advance automation and robotics,  amazon robotics  today announced it is providing a substantial investment over three years to the georgia institute of technology’s  advanced technology development center  (atdc). 
 atdc is georgia’s technology startup incubator and helps entrepreneurs across the state build, launch, and scale successful companies. the goal of the gift is to accelerate growth of automation and robotics by leveraging staff and resources at atdc in collaboration with amazon. 
 “our mission is to support infrastructure for startups and to help foster compelling startup companies with tremendous talent that solve big problems,” said thomas felis, director of robotics strategy for amazon global robotics. “equally important to us is georgia tech’s track record of working with and supporting entrepreneurs from diverse and underrepresented backgrounds.” 
 the funding includes allocation for an atdc full-time automation and robotics catalyst to recruit and coach companies focused on automation and robotics. the catalyst will identify relevant startups and help onboard them into atdc’s startup pipeline and portfolio. 
 “georgia tech is a leader in robotics research, and we are excited to have amazon support our startup mission at atdc to bring entrepreneurial ideas to life and to market,” said john avery, atdc director. “innovation can come from anywhere and everywhere, and this collaboration reflects our commitment to support diverse startup founders.” 
 this effort will also support georgia tech’s ongoing robotics research, including the  institute for robotics and intelligent machines . 
 the amazon sponsorship expands atdc’s targeted vertical focus areas to seven, including financial, health, and retail technology, 5g, logistics and supply chain, and advanced manufacturing. 
 atdc will also work with amazon to identify specific areas of technical interest with the aim of developing virtual and physical events to attract relevant startups. 
 to apply to join the robotics and automation incubator, click  here . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 peralte c. paul 
 peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu 
 404.316.1210 
 email 
 peralte@atdc.org 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000