annual compliance training ending soon 
 all active employees (faculty, staff, tech temps, retired-but-working, and student employees) hired on or before oct. 3, 2022, are required to complete the 2022 annual compliance training no later than monday, dec. 19. 
 nov 28, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 all active employees (faculty, staff, tech temps, retired-but-working, and student employees) hired on or before oct. 3, 2022, are required to complete the 2022 annual compliance training no later than monday, dec. 19. this year, employees are required to complete the following training modules: 
 effective global engagement 
 export control and trade compliance 
 external activity reporting and conflict of interest / coi attestation 
 identifying and responding to sexual misconduct 
 data excellence 
 university system of georgia (usg) ethics training 
 cybersecurity awareness training 2022 / your role: internet security and you 
 the annual compliance training can be completed on a desktop or laptop. this year’s training includes more modules than in previous years, and you should set aside up to 2.5 hours to complete all the training. it does not need to be finished at one time, and the deadline to complete the training has been extended to monday, dec. 19. 
 employees are reminded to not use a firefox browser to complete the identifying and responding to sexual misconduct module. in addition, employees must complete 
 and 
 submit the coi attestation in order to receive credit for this module. 
 visit 
 georgia tech’s employee learning portal 
 today to complete the 2022 annual compliance training. employees who do not fully complete the requirements by midnight on dec. 19 may receive a formal disciplinary notice from the institute. 
 for more information on the 2022 annual compliance training, including helpful resources, visit 
 ethicsfirst.gatech.edu / trainingandresources . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 terry grumley bridges , ccep 
 gtri director of ethics and compliance 
 office of ethics and compliance 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000