anthem unveils innovation studio in technology square 
 georgia tech president g.p. “bud” peterson joined anthem inc. today, as the company unveiled its new innovation studio in technology square. 
 georgia tech president g.p. "bud" peterson welcomed anthem to technology square. the fortune 50 company, one of america’s largest insurance providers, opened an innovation studio in the centergy building. 
 may 18, 2016 
 — atlanta, ga 
 georgia tech president g.p. “bud” peterson joined representatives from anthem inc. today, as the company unveiled its new innovation studio in technology square. as the first fortune 50 health benefits company with an innovation center in technology square, anthem will be able to tap into georgia tech’s existing research and technology, cultivate strategic relationships, and develop opportunities for collaborating with other technology and innovation companies in the area. the studio is a state-of-the-art facility housing a multi-disciplinary team who will focus on creating new capabilities to enhance the consumer health care experience, improve the quality of care, and lower health care costs. encompassing 6,500 square-feet, this open-concept office space will foster innovation by providing a collaborative environment that brings together industry leaders and technology experts. “innovation in health care is a priority for anthem. by accelerating the development and implementation of new technologies, we’ll deliver a superior, more personalized health care experience for consumers,” said tom miller, senior vice president and chief information officer for anthem, inc. “we have created a dynamic ecosystem to generate ideas and launch them into the initiatives, solutions and programs that can help transform health care.” 
 additional images 
 contact 
 media contact: lance wallace, 404-660-2928, 
 lance.wallace@comm.gatech.edu economic development contact: greg king,  greg.king@gatech.edu 
 email 
 lance.wallace@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000