applications open to run for student government 
 students can sign up to run both undergraduate and graduate positions. 
 mar 02, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 applications are now open to run for positions within georgia tech’s student government association (sga). undergraduate students can run for a seat in the undergraduate house of representatives (uhr) or for the undergraduate presidential ticket. graduate students can apply to run for the graduate presidential ticket or to be appointed to the executive cabinet. 
 seats in uhr are broken down by academic major, class / year, and special constituencies, including transfer and international students. learn more about uhr 
 here . each undergraduate presidential ticket consists of a candidate for president and executive vice president. the responsibilities for each position can be found 
 here . 
 undergraduate applications close on friday, march 5, at 5 p.m. campaigning will begin sunday, march 7, at midnight, and polls will open on monday, march 22 at midnight. the undergraduate election season will conclude on friday, march 26, at 5 p.m., when polls close and campaigning stops. 
 graduate students can apply to run for the presidential ticket, which also contains both president and executive vice president, by sunday, march 21, at 5 p.m. campaigning will begin the next day, and polls will be open from thursday, march 25 to monday, march 29, at 5 p.m. results will be announced in the graduate student senate on march 30. the application can be found 
 here . 
 applications 
 to join the graduate cabinet will close on sunday, april 11, at 5 p.m. from there, the newly-elected president and executive vice president will appoint people to various positions. learn more about the duties of all executive positions, including the presidential ticket and cabinet, 
 here . elections for the graduate student senate will be held in the fall. 
 no prior sga experience is required to run for any position. the application can be found 
 here . questions about any part of the election process can be sent to 
 sga@gatech.edu . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 sga website 
 contact 
 grace wyner 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000