astronaut mae jemison to deliver mlk lecture 
 astronaut mae jemison will be the keynote speaker for georgia tech’s 2019 mlk lecture on tuesday, january 22, at 7 p.m. at the ferst center for the arts. 
 mae jemison, nasa astronaut 
 jan 17, 2019 
 — atlanta, ga 
 mae jemison, an engineer, physician, and nasa astronaut, will be the keynote speaker for georgia tech’s 2019 mlk lecture on tuesday, january 22, at 7 p.m. at the ferst center for the arts. 
 jemison made history in 1992 when she went into orbit aboard the space shuttle endeavor, becoming the first african-american woman to travel in space. after earning a medical degree from cornell medical college in 1981, she had a brief medical practice before serving in the peace corps from 1985 until 1987 when nasa selected her to join their astronaut corps. she resigned from nasa in 1993 to found her own company, the jemison group, which researches, markets, and develops science and technology for daily life. in 1999, she founded biosentient corporation and has been working to develop a portable device that allows mobile monitoring of the involuntary nervous system. in 2012, she made the winning bid for the darpa 100-year starship project through the dorothy jemison foundation for excellence. she has appeared on television several times, including an appearance in an episode of 
 star trek: the next generation. 
 free mlk lecture tickets for students are available at 
 gatech.universitytickets.com / w / default.aspx . registration for faculty, staff, and community members has reached maximum capacity due to limited seating and a high level of interest. to sign up for the waitlist, please click 
 here . you will be contacted if additional tickets become available. 
 for more on tech’s mlk celebration events, see: 
 diversity.gatech.edu / mlk-celebration-events 
 additional images 
 related links 
 mlk celebration events 
 contact 
 victor rogers 
 institute communications 
 email 
 victor.rogers@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000