atdc taking applications for 2018 venture showcase to boston 
 15 georgia-based technology firms will be selected to present to boston-based venture capitalists in september. 
 tech square 
 jun 25, 2018 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the advanced technology development center (atdc), the state of georgia's technology incubator, is now accepting applications from high-growth technology startups for its 2018 venture showcase to boston on september 12. 
 the application period is open now through 5 p.m. on july 13. any georgia-headquartered technology company raising a series a round or higher in the next six months is eligible. the companies chosen to go to boston will be notified july 20 after the selection committee has reviewed all applications. 
 because boston has a number of investors focused on medical and health innovation, this particular showcase will dedicate a segment of the program for companies exclusively from this sector. 
 all georgia-based companies interested in being considered should fill out an application form via this 
 link . applicants are not required to be atdc portfolio companies. those who have questions may email atdc investor relations manager michael a. maziar at michael.maziar@atdc.org. 
 “we continue to build momentum of our previous venture showcases in silicon valley and new york," maziar said, noting this is the first such trip to boston. "our three previous venture showcases resulted in over $25 million in actual investments and millions more in term sheets. some companies from our april showcase on the west coast are still in negotiations for an investment. 
 “we are very excited about the success of our showcases in terms of venture deals done and in how many investors from these regions now come regularly to georgia to meet technology companies" said atdc interim director jane mccracken. “this interest illustrates the caliber of companies in the state, and atdc is proud to facilitate investor connections through these showcases as well as the direct introductions we provide to our portfolio companies.” 
 the initiative brings georgia-based technology companies to the cities that have the most venture capital and is designed to facilitate targeted conversations and connections, she said. 
 the venture showcase is co-sponsored by morris, manning & martin, silicon valley bank, venture atlanta, the metro atlanta chamber, aprio and dla piper, which will host the event at its boston offices. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 for media inquiries, contact: péralte c. paul peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu 
 for information about the atdc venture showcase, contact: michael a. maziar michael.maziar@atdc.org 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000