biannual compliance training ends this friday 
 employees have until 11:59 p.m. (edt) on friday, oct. 27, to complete all of the training modules. 
 oct 20, 2023 
 the deadline to complete the 2023 fall biannual compliance training is friday, oct. 27. all faculty, staff, and student employees, who are active employees as of sept. 18, are required to complete this training. email reminders have been distributed throughout the training period to employees who have not completed the training (and their managers). 
 beginning monday, oct. 30, access to georgia tech systems will be interrupted for employees who fail to complete the training by the oct. 27 deadline. employees will need to complete all four of the training modules in order to restore their access to the georgia tech systems. 
 employees can access the training at  b.gatech.edu / genius . it will take a little over one hour to complete. 
 the required training modules include: 
 university system of georgia ethics refresher. 
 sexual misconduct. 
 ethics in action (includes conflict of interest attestation). 
 cybersecurity awareness / 2023 your role: internet security and you. 
 the first three training modules are accessible via the 
 genius 
 platform. to complete the cybersecurity awareness training module, you will be redirected to knowb4, where you will select the “training” tab to access “2023 your role: internet security and you.” 
 it can take up to 24 hours for the system to update to show completion, and you can verify that you have completed all the training at 
 b.gatech.edu / genius . you have completed the required training if, on the right side of your home page under completed courses, you see both “2023 fall biannual compliance training” and “2023 fall biannual compliance training cybersecurity.” in addition, you will receive two certifications – one in genius and one in knowb4 – indicating that you have completed the full 2023 fall biannual compliance training. 
 the institute appreciates the community's dedication to exercising sound ethical judgment, acting with integrity and transparency, and upholding the university system of georgia's and the institute's policies and compliance obligations. 
 questions about the training may be submitted to  compliance training request help . for additional assistance, contact terry bridges, interim compliance training manager, at  terry.bridges@gtri.gatech.edu . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 2023 fall biannual compliance training faqs 
 2023 fall biannual compliance training – cybersecurity faqs 
 compliance training request help 
 biannual compliance campaign training reporting: manager ethics and compliance … 
 contact 
 terry bridges 
 interim compliance training manager 
 office of the general counsel 
 email 
 terry.bridges@gtri.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000