biospark labs announces expansion to support life sciences research in science square 
 georgia advanced technology ventures inc., an affiliate of the georgia institute of technology, has announced the expansion of biospark labs. 
 nov 16, 2022 
 georgia advanced technology ventures inc., an affiliate of the georgia institute of technology, has announced the expansion of 
 biospark labs 
 — a collaborative, shared laboratory environment designed to enable life sciences and biotech startups. the $6 million expansion will increase the facility’s usable footprint to 17,000 square feet by adding 11 new private and shared labs, shared scientific equipment spaces, and additional workspaces and offices to attract and support the emerging researchers in the bioscience industry. 
 biospark labs is already home to several bioscience startups, including arnav biotech, exvade bioscience, synthbiome, and karnelian x, an innovator in cancer treatment with significant expansion plans. microelectronics startup saras micro devices also occupies space in biospark labs. 
 “biospark labs is designed to offer fully fitted-out, equipped, and professionally operated laboratory and office space — representing a significant amount of the necessary services and support that early-stage companies need to begin laboratory operations on day one,” said tony zivalich, associate vice president for real estate development. “in addition, it offers an intellectually and culturally enhanced environment with a neighborhood of researchers participating in a rich collaborative community environment adjacent to georgia tech.” 
 located in science square, which is designated as a federal opportunity zone, biospark labs helps advance and expand the ecosystem for bioscience research and commercialization in atlanta. the planned expansion is expected to be completed by mid-2023. 
 about georgia advanced technology ventures inc. 
 georgia advanced technology ventures inc. (gatv) is a legally separate, not-for-profit corporation that is organized and operated exclusively as a supporting organization to and for the benefit of the georgia institute of technology. 
 gatv’s primary business purpose is to facilitate innovation and business collaboration with private enterprise, including but not limited to business, industry, entrepreneurs, and economic developers, and utilizing emerging technologies that are aligned with the strengths in research and education of georgia tech. 
 gatv provides support for technology transfer and economic development activities, including the institute’s advanced technology development center (atdc) incubator facilities and services to atdc-affiliated companies. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 biospark labs 
 georgia advanced technology ventures, inc. 
 office of real estate development 
 contact 
 tony zivalich 
 associate vice president for real estate 
 office: 404.385.2692 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000