black student organizations celebrate homecoming 
 these events empower and bring together the african american community on campus. 
 homecoming step show 
 oct 04, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 throughout the years, black student organizations at tech have developed unique traditions that celebrate their history and culture. some of these focus on homecoming week, such as the annual step show and the black alumni organization (bao) tailgate. these events empower and build community while also celebrating homecoming on georgia tech’s campus. 
 “the traditions create a safe space at tech, because seeing others who look similar makes you feel comfortable,” said kemuel russell, president of the african american student union. the many black student organizations all contribute to homecoming week events, bringing everyone together. 
 on thursday, oct. 6, the national pan-hellenic council (nphc) will host 
 step show 
 at the ferst center for the arts. step is a form of percussive dance in which rhythms are produced through steps, claps, and words. step show will take place from 7 to 10 p.m., and tickets are $10 for students, faculty, and staff and $15 for the general public. 
 the 
 black alumni organization tailgate 
 begins at 2 p.m. saturday, oct. 8. this is part of a weekend of events put on by bao, including a reception friday and a brunch sunday celebrating women of color. the tailgate is a great way to meet other students, as well as alumni who will be on campus for the homecoming game. 
 “the tailgate gave me an opportunity to connect with black student organizations and uplift the community,” russell said. the tailgate takes place in harrison square near the statues of the three pioneers, celebrating the history of black students at tech. this event is a way for many students to find a community they may not usually see in their classes or usual clubs. 
 “after the tailgate, i wanted to be an advocate for the black community and spread it to all of campus,” said russell. many more traditions follow throughout the year, but homecoming serves as a beginning for many students. these traditions continue to write the history of tech and reflect the vibrancy of the campus community. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 connor white 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000