bolton named georgia tech’s new executive vice president for administration and finance and chief business officer 
 following a national search, the georgia institute of technology has selected shantay bolton as its new executive vice president for administration and finance and chief business officer. 
 jun 21, 2023 
 following a national search, the georgia institute of technology has selected 
 shantay bolton 
 as its new executive vice president for administration and finance 
 (a&f) 
 and chief business officer . she joins georgia tech from 
 washington university in st. louis , where she serves as executive vice chancellor 
 for administration and 
 chief 
 administrative 
 officer. 
 as the executive vice president 
 for a&f 
 and chief business officer , 
 bolton 
 will 
 serve as a member of the institute’s executive leadership team and lead in developing administrative and operational strategies across the enterprise in support of georgia 
 tech ’s 
 strategic plan. she will 
 provide 
 leadership, oversight, and direction for 
 a&f , which includes fi scal 
 management and reporting; budgeting; human resources; business services; campus sustainability; facilities planning, design, construction, maintenance, and operations; campus safety; information systems and technology; 
 and 
 real estate development. 
 more than 1, 500 
 staff report through 
 a&f . 
 bolton 
 will begin her new role on 
 aug. 
 14 
 and report to president ángel cabrera. 
 “ shantay’s leadership and operational experience 
 in higher education will serve us well at georgia tech 
 as we continue to 
 grow and 
 implement our strategic plan ,” cabrera said. “ her commitment to strengthening the employee experience and developing strategies that advance sustainability and 
 workplace 
 diversity will greatly enhance tech’s ability to achieve our academic, research, and service missions. ” 
 at washington university, bolton 
 provides 
 strategic counsel to university leadership and serves as the key point person for university operations. bolton 
 is responsible for 
 spearheading effective strategies in administration, including information technology, human resources, public safety, procurement, supplier diversity, and the danforth campus operations and facilities. 
 prior to joining washington university, she served as vice president and deputy chief operating officer at tulane university and founding director of the tulane leadership institute. bolton has served as a board member for the american association of blacks in higher education ; 
 as a faculty member of the leadership and mentoring institute; 
 and 
 as a reviewer 
 for 
 the society for industrial and organizational psychologist anti-racism grant subcommittee . she 
 is the creator of e3 © : engage, educate, empower , 
 which 
 seeks 
 to 
 empower 
 individuals and teams to achieve organizational goals. she is also an active member of zeta phi beta sorority and currently serves as an 
 i nternational 
 d irector 
 for zeta organizational leadership , 
 which 
 provides 
 professional development opportunities for its members. 
 she earned a 
 bachelor’s 
 degree in 
 p sychology 
 and a 
 master’s 
 in 
 c ounseling 
 p sychology 
 from alabama a&m university. she 
 holds 
 a 
 ph.d. in 
 o rganizational 
 p sychology 
 with a concentration in 
 i ndustrial 
 p sychology 
 from walden university and an mba in 
 c orporate 
 b usiness 
 from florida international university. 
 her 
 achievements 
 at 
 washington university 
 include 
 the establishment of the institute for leadership excellence; overseeing the university joining the st. louis anchor action network; kulture city training for university officers to implement an inclusive safety intervention framework; and launching the it strategic plan. 
 additionally , s he 
 oversaw 
 the electrification of the university’s shuttle fleet and the transition to a new dining 
 services 
 partnership. 
 bolton also 
 made 
 an impact 
 within the st. louis 
 area 
 — including 
 philanthropic support 
 for the 
 march of dimes, service as a founding donor and 
 a dvisory 
 b oard member 
 of 
 the 
 easter seals midwest women’s giving collective , 
 and 
 serving 
 on the 
 c ity 
 of clayton, missouri , 
 m unicipal 
 j udge 
 s election 
 p anel. 
 she 
 was 
 named a 2023 st. 
 louis titan 100 , for 
 which she also serves as a board member. bolton is 
 an 
 alum na 
 of the agb institute for leadership & governance in higher education . 
 “ it is a privilege to lead administration and finance at georgia tech, as i believe so deeply in both the impact of public education and how excellence can be achieved by the collective power of people within organizations," said bolton. "i am eager to work with the leadership team under president cabrera to achieve institutional goals and to continue the forward momentum of this world-renowned institution by learning from and growing with my new team members." 
 current interim leadership for 
 administration and finance 
 will remain 
 in 
 place until bolton joins in august. 
 “as we welcome 
 shantay , 
 i 
 also extend 
 my 
 gratitude to 
 the interim a&f leadership team , 
 who 
 have 
 helped the institute successfully navigate this transitional period 
 and advance many of the institute’s strategic initiatives ,” 
 cabrera said . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 administration and finance 
 contact 
 rachael pocklington 
 institute communications 
 email 
 rpocklington@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000