bras talks future of higher education 
 on april 30, rafael l. bras, georgia tech’s provost and executive vice president for academic affairs, participated in “the future of higher education,” panel as part of the milken institute global conference 2018. 
 bras participates in milken global conference 2018 
 may 04, 2018 
 — atlanta, ga 
 on april 30, rafael l. bras, georgia tech’s provost and executive vice president for academic affairs, participated in “the future of higher education,” panel as part of the milken institute global conference 2018. the 21 st 
 annual conference hosted attendees from more than 60 nations and included event tracks on jobs and education, industry, media and technology, aging, and equality, among others. 
 “higher education must be responsive to the changing nature of both learner needs and the demands of employers,” said bras. “that will require new delivery methods, new products, and new interaction points to meet those needs on-demand and in real time.” 
 in late april, georgia tech released 
 deliberate innovation, lifetime education , a report that outlines innovative and alternative educational models to address the changing needs of learners and employers. the report followed more than two years of work by tech’s commission on creating the next in education (cne), a collaborative effort of more than 50 faculty, staff, and students. anchored in a recommendation called the georgia tech commitment to a lifetime education, the report envisions a university of the future that provides an educational experience that can be personalized as professional interests or needs shift over an individual’s lifetime. 
 the other panelists included bill achtmeyer, founder and senior managing director of ey-parthenon, mitch daniels, president of purdue university, yoshimasa hayashi, minister of education, culture, sports, science and technology for the government of japan, and candace thille, director, learning science and engineering at amazon.com. 
 the panel, held at the beverly wilshire hotel in los angeles, was moderated by jeffrey selingo, a visiting scholar at tech’s center for 21 st 
 century universities. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 deliberate innovation, lifetime education 
 video: future of higher education panel 
 contact 
 susie ivy 
 institute communications 
 404-385-3782 
 email 
 susie.ivy@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000