call for projects: 2022 accelerate festival 
 students, faculty, and staff encouraged to submit their projects the 2022 accelerate: acc smithsonian creativity and innovation festival. 
 may 03, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 georgia tech is accepting applications for student, faculty, and staff projects for the 2022 accelerate: acc smithsonian creativity and innovation festival 
 to be held spring 2022 in washington, dc. 
 the three-day festival serves as a gathering of all institutions included in the atlantic coast conference to celebrate creativity and innovation with a specific focus on science, engineering, art, and design. the festival will be held at the smithsonian national museum of american history; in 2019 the festival drew more than 34,000 visitors. the 2022 event will mark the third time the acc institutions have gathered for the accelerate festival, and each of the previous events have featured georgia tech projects. 
 georgia tech seeks to showcase innovative, trans-disciplinary projects at the intersection of science, engineering, art, design, and technology. faculty, staff, and students should submit engaging and compelling projects with supportive media that demonstrate research and / or teaching impacts and have the potential to attract visitors. projects can include cutting-edge technologies, innovative businesses or ideas, social innovation projects, or interactive installations. 
 applications will be evaluated based on completion / readiness for large-scale public presentation, suitability for the venue, and potential to actively engage the festival audience. participating in this national festival is free and provides the opportunity to meet investors, potential collaborators, and interact with a diverse international audience. 
 the deadline for project consideration for the upcoming festival is friday, may 21, 2021.  the top georgia tech projects will then be submitted for acc and smithsonian review and evaluation, with notification of project acceptance in august 2021. 
 projects should be submitted online at 
 https: / / gatech.co1.qualtrics.com / jfe / form / sv_dd3kxfsozv0a1cf 
 for information on the accelerate festival and to view projects from previous festivals, please visit http: / / acceleratefestival.com / . 
 additional images 
 email 
 info@arts.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000