campus environment evolves and adapts 
 the latest on campus construction, renovation, and renewal projects. 
 the current scope for the east campus streetscape project. pending design costs, the final scope may vary. 
 feb 20, 2023 
 — atlanta, ga 
 “the campus built environment is continuously evolving and adapting to support and celebrate learning and research while simultaneously addressing sustainability, resiliency, and justice,” says vice president of 
 infrastructure and sustainability 
 maria cimilluca. 
 whether it is a brand-new building such as the reck garage, an interior renovation in the d.m. smith building, or an exterior streetscape initiative like the ferst drive realignment and cycle track, the planning, design, and construction department consistently monitors the changing needs of the campus community. cimilluca adds, “our role at infrastructure and sustainability is to weave together the tenets of the institute’s strategic plan with the individual goals and programs of the campus and surrounding community to help georgia tech achieve its mission and vision by executing projects that foster this impact.” 
 complete or soon to wrap up 
 reck garage 
 constructed to house and display the ramblin’ wreck, the nearly all-glass building with showroom-quality lighting, state-of-the-art security system, and rooftop solar array will foster community spirit in the heart of campus. 
 the garage 
 houses a tool bench, vehicle turntable, and hydraulic lift for students to maintain the automobile. located near the campus center and the campanile plaza, the structure will showcase the beloved mascot. an outdoor plaza will allow the reck club to host community-building events before home football games and provide gathering and study space for students. the much-anticipated project is complete, with an opening celebration planned for march 7. the reck garage was made possible by a generous gift from the wallis family in memory of w. barry wallis, me 1968. 
 coliseum annex renovation 
 with a mid-january unveiling, this 14,450-square-foot renovation project provides a new home for the georgia tech track and field and cross country teams. improvements include new offices for coaches and upgraded men's and women's locker rooms that feature charging ports, plush seating, and generous storage for each student-athlete. a spacious multiuse team meeting room, a lounge and nutrition bar, an athletic training room, and a hydrotherapy room provide state-of-the-art functional and support space. the third-floor renovation created two new locker rooms for officials and visiting teams. updated graphics and branding throughout the building highlight the history of both teams. 
 community and chefs garden expansion 
 the community garden, on the east side of the instructional center, added 20 individual garden planters along with upgraded and accessible pathways and ada accessible plots. the installation of cooking instruction tables and facilities allows for chef demonstrations. additional fruit trees were planted in the orchard area along with the installation of a new composting area, a storage shed, area fencing, and irrigation. project completion is expected by early spring. 
 in progress 
 tech square phase 3 
 tech square phase 3, once complete, will include 400,000 gross square footage of academic and research space located within two high-rise towers. the scheller tower will house graduate and executive education programs for the scheller college of business and is named for the generous philanthropic commitment of roberta and ernest scheller jr. the george tower, named for philanthropists william “bill” and penny george, will be the new home of the h. milton stewart school of industrial and systems engineering. a large plaza and retail space are planned for the street level. project specifics are under review, with a projected occupancy date of early 2026. 
 read more here . 
 science square 
 twenty acres of mostly undeveloped land just off north avenue near northside drive will transform into a new biomedical research and technology community. science square will expand biotech and life science research lab space and help revitalize and nurture new opportunities on atlanta's west side. a 13-story tower will feature clean rooms, labs, and research space as well as affordable housing and ground-floor retail space. currently, the tower has columns and floors constructed through the fourth floor, with progress on the residential construction and parking deck beginning to take shape. science square is slated to open in 2024. 
 read more here . 
 aerospace engineering aircraft hangar 
 the aircraft hangar facility is in the north avenue research area next to the tech way building complex. this project will primarily focus on creating a facility to design, assemble, and house small aircraft for research in the daniel guggenheim school of aerospace engineering. the facility will be approximately 10,000 square feet and feature a high bay as well as a mezzanine level available for future development. the project is in the final design stages, with construction planned for late spring. 
 d.m. smith building renewal 
 renovations will include several upgrades to the building’s infrastructure, including strengthening ada compliance by creating a permanent wheelchair access feature and adding an elevator. new mechanical, electrical, and plumbing systems will be installed, enhancing the building’s energy efficiency. a virtual lab and hoteling space will be created for the school of public policy. all proposed changes will respect the historical character of the building. the project is currently in the design process, with construction slated for completion in 2025. 
 georgia tech veterans walk of honor 
 located outside of the veterans resource center, this tribute project will honor all georgia tech alumni, students, and staff who have served in the u.s. armed forces. the walkway leading to the veterans resource center will feature granite inlays and mounted wall plaques recognizing the six military branches. each inlay will include a portion of morse code representing the individual branch’s slogan or motto. adjacent elevated signage will display the core values of military service: honor, courage, commitment, respect, duty, valor, service, and integrity. an upper plaza reflection area is complete with an american flag overlooking griffin track and mccamish pavilion, with the city skyline in the distance. final details are being confirmed and construction is scheduled to begin this summer. 
 east campus streetscape 
 along techwood drive and the east side of campus, the renovation of sidewalks and roadways will improve pedestrian, cyclist, and micro-mobility access while supporting the insitute's safety, connectivity, and carbon neutrality goals. these alternative-mode routes will have improved lighting and coordinate with the campus bus systems. the project is in the design development stage, with phased construction planned for late summer. 
 ferst drive realignment and cycle track 
 this realignment, safety, and connectivity project will provide improved bicycle infrastructure and allow for separation between bikes, pedestrians, and vehicles. this project will also address the realignment of ferst drive at regents drive, which will eliminate the traffic signal and enable connectivity to the planned bicycle infrastructure southwest of campus. a cycle track will be installed along ferst drive, providing improved safety and separation between cycles and buses at the bus stops. this project is in the design phase. construction is planned for summer, and completion is slated for fall 2024. 
 student athlete performance center 
 the 96,000-square-foot facility will be built on the footprint of the current edge / rice center in the northeast corner of bobby dodd stadium. the center will house strength and conditioning space, a dining hall and nutrition rooms, a dedicated sports science and data analytics area, and a sports medicine and recovery room. ticket sales will remain at this location. the center will also include a football player’s lounge, meeting space, and athletic support offices. additionally, there will be terrace views of the field and midtown atlanta. schematic designs are underway and tenant moveout will take place in late spring. the project is scheduled for completion in early 2026. 
 progressive workspace pilots 
 progressive workspace solutions at georgia tech align space with the working styles of the associated unit, resulting in a carefully curated combination of individual and shared work, meeting, and collaboration spaces. the intent of these progressive designed environments is to foster engagement, innovation and improve space utilization and satisfaction. currently, multiple pilot projects are under construction across campus. institute communications, a department of about 80 employees, is moving from a traditional configuration of assigned, enclosed, individual offices in the wardlaw center to a redesigned flexible workspace in lyman hall. utilizing the latest in scheduling technology, the lyman hall progressive pilot will offer reservable space in either private offices or open desk areas with the flexible amenities of both open and enclosed collaboration and meeting spaces. additionally, a connective multipurpose hub will accommodate impromptu gatherings and encourage employee interaction. these progressive workspace pilots will be measured with timely qualitative satisfaction surveys and the resultant data will inform future strategic space planning projects throughout the campus community. 
 coming soon 
 national pan-hellenic council - divine nine plaza 
 the divine nine are the nine historically black fraternities and sororities that comprise the national pan-hellenic council. design plans currently feature a plaza area with nine distinct circular gathering spaces that include wooden seating, a variety of plant materials, and a central gathering lawn. located adjacent to the student center parking deck, the plaza will include an 820-square-foot stage with terraced seating. the project is in the design phase, and construction is scheduled to begin in the fall. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 a dream garage come true 
 contact 
 cathy brim 
 communications officer ii 
 infrastructure and sustainability 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000