campus events abound for ethics week 
 ethics week returns this year with a focus on navigating ethics at georgia tech and beyond. 
 ethics week 2022 
 oct 28, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 ethics week returns this year with a focus on navigating ethics at georgia tech and beyond. one of 
 georgia tech’s core values , “we act ethically,” guides our priorities every day, and while ethics is a year-round priority, ethics week puts a spotlight on all the various ways our campus engages in ethical decision making. 
 this year’s events, taking place nov. 7 – 11, will be a mix of scheduled online presentations and in-person events. campus experts and guest speakers will join the 
 office of ethics and compliance 
 to showcase ethics in a variety of ways. 
 “ethics week is a great opportunity to highlight the incredible experts across the institute who can offer perspectives about the importance of ethical decision-making in all that we do,” said danette joslyn-gaul, general counsel and vice president for ethics, compliance, and legal affairs. “although ethics week is just one week, i hope that it will offer the campus community a greater connection and understanding of the institute’s core values, as well as identifying resources and pathways for support to apply these lessons into the world every day.” 
 below is a list of a few highlighted events. 
 campus clash – gameshow extravaganza 
 monday, nov. 7, from 1 to 2 p.m. in the atlantic theater of the john lewis student center, campus leaders will go head-to-head playing a familiar family feud game with a georgia tech twist to kick off ethics week. participants include: 
 president ángel cabrera 
 executive vice president for research chaouki abdallah 
 interim executive vice president for administration and finance mike shannon 
 vice president for student engagement and well-being luoluo hong 
 vice president and chief human resources officer skye duckett 
 alumni association president dene sheheane 
 college of engineering dean raheem beyah 
 georgia tech library dean leslie sharp 
 student government association president rohan shohani 
 rsvp for the event. 
 attendees will receive ethics week giveaways and enjoy snacks. 
 hybrid work and building community: intersections with ethical decision making 
 ethics week keynote 
 on wednesday, nov. 9. from 11 a.m. to noon, keynote speaker steve cohn will share insights about expectations and best practices for building community with a hybrid workforce to support ethical decision making and prevent employee alienation. cohn helps people and companies have better, more productive relationships. this event will take place in the atlantic theater of the john lewis student center. 
 rsvp for the event. 
 attendees will receive ethics week giveaways. 
 authorship: promising practices and challenges 
 join georgia tech faculty on wednesday, nov. 9, from 2 to 3 p.m. virtually to discuss authorship norms and strategies for avoiding authorship disagreements. research is core to georgia tech's mission, and those engaged in research collaborations may at times have to navigate complexities connected to authorship. 
 rsvp for the event. 
 moderated by: assistant vice provost for advocacy and conflict resolution kyla turpin ross 
 panelists: 
 director of graduate research ethics programs jason borenstein 
 school of biological sciences associate professor ingeborg schmidt-krey 
 professor and vice president for interdisciplinary research julia kubanek 
 protecting data: a conversation with georgia tech and coca-cola 
 from classified research to secret recipes — it's all about protecting data from outside sources. join insider threat protection managers from georgia tech and coca-cola on thursday, nov. 10, from 1 to 2 p.m. as they discuss challenges and success with protecting the information and resources that keep their institutions running. 
 rsvp for this in-person event 
 in the atlantic theater of the john lewis student center. 
 participants who attend three ethics week events will get a long-sleeve t-shirt while supplies last. all in-person events will have giveaways and light refreshments. for a full list of events, chances to win door prizes, and to register, visit 
 ethicsfirst.gatech.edu / ethicsweek . the university system of georgia (usg) is also hosting events, and information is included on the schedule. 
 this year, ethics week coincides with the 
 annual online compliance training 
 that is required of all employees. this campaign and training prepare georgia tech employees to exercise sound ethical judgment, act with integrity and transparency, and understand their responsibility for the usg’s and institute's policies and compliance obligations. 
 learn more about ethics at georgia tech at 
 ethicsfirst.gatech.edu . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 ethics and compliance 
 contact 
 morgan miller 
 communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000