campus celebrates gt cares week 
 events show support for campus community. 
 gt cares week is a week of activities to show support and appreciation for students, faculty, and staff. (photo by joya chapman) 
 oct 06, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the georgia tech staff council, in collaboration with georgia tech human resources (gthr), presents 
 gt cares week , combining several events into a week of activities to show support and appreciation for students, faculty, and staff. 
 “in order to continue meeting the needs of our staff and reinforce staff council’s mission to engage, advocate, and inform, we felt it was important to expand our annual staff appreciation day into a full week of events that not only addressed employee engagement, but also their well-being, while reinforcing georgia tech’s values,” said candice bovian, well-being program manager in gthr and staff council chair. “we look forward to celebrating the entire campus community during this week.” 
 schedule of gt cares week: 
 gt cares week kickoff , monday, oct. 10, 11 a.m. – 1 p.m., exhibition hall walkway. visit the staff council table to pick up swag and learn how to win a grand prize. open to students, faculty, and staff. 
 l.o.v.e. gt day , tuesday, oct. 11, 11 a.m. – 2 p.m., tech green. celebrate and recognize the community for 
 living our values every day . enjoy interactive stations, treats, and swag giveaways. open to students, faculty, and staff. 
 staff council wellness wednesday , oct. 12, 9 a.m. – 3 p.m., bill moore student success center and o’keefe building. engage in wellness activities to help learn how to manage stress. open to faculty and staff. 
 staff appreciation day 2022 , thursday, oct. 13, 11 a.m. – 3 p.m., john lewis student center piedmont room and tech rec. georgia tech staff council presents a day of appreciation for staff with food, fun, and more. open to staff only. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 victor rogers 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000