campus recreation hosts four championship swim meets this spring 
 over the next two months, the campus recreation center (crc) complex and the mcauley aquatic center will host three championship events: the georgia high school association (ghsa) meet, the athletic coast conference (acc) meet and the national colligate a 
 feb 02, 2022 
 — campus recreation center 
 over the next two months, the campus recreation center (crc) complex and the mcauley aquatic center will host three championship events: the georgia high school association (ghsa) meet, the athletic coast conference (acc) meet and the national colligate athletic associate (ncaa) meet. 
 unlike last year, when spectators were not allowed, these events will likely increase the number of people and traffic in that area of campus. participant drop-off will take place on tech parkway at the back entrance of the crc, while spectators will enter through the main doors on ferst drive. the campus community should exercise extra caution when driving through this area and expect delays as tech parkway will be periodically closed for athlete arrival. 
 during these meets, the mcauley aquatic center will be closed to patrons feb. 3-5 (ghsa meet), feb. 14-19 (acc championship meet), march 14-19 (ncaa women’s meet), and march 21-26 (ncaa men’s meet). the crawford leisure pool will remain open with adjusted hours, which will be posted at  crc.gatech.edu / aquatics . 
 each swim meet is expected to run from 7:30 a.m. until 7 p.m. wednesday through friday, and 9 a.m. to 8 p.m. on saturday. to accommodate the influx of swimmers and fans, parking and transportation services will use the w10-crc deck and the w2-student center decks for swim meet guests. 
 affected permit customers will receive emails with specific parking instructions for this event. for those who don’t need to park or drive in these areas, walking or taking campus transit is encouraged. the georgia tech police department will set up checkpoints and direct traffic to ease congestion. 
 completed in 1995 to host the 1996 summer olympics swimming and diving competitions, the mcauley aquatic center in the crc is considered one of the fastest pools in the world. the crc hosts several swim meets throughout the year, keeping the olympic spirit alive. 
 for crc aquatics special events and closures, visit  crc.gatech.edu / aquatics . for more information about parking and transportation changes, visit  pts.gatech.edu . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 campus recreation center 
 contact 
 sara warner 
 student engagement & well-being 
 sara.warner@studentlife.gatech.edu 
 email 
 sara.warner@studentlife.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000