careers phase 2 rollout this month 
 phase 2 is going live in september and will bring competitive hiring searches for academic faculty and research faculty (excluding gtri) positions into careers. 
 sep 11, 2020 
 — atlanta, ga 
 as part of georgia tech's transition to oneusg connect in march, we launched careers to support the hiring of staff and tech temps.  careers  is an applicant tracking system designed to provide easy-to-follow actions for every step in the recruiting process, allowing employees and external candidates to search, view, and apply for jobs online. 
 georgia tech is using a phased approach to fully implement the careers module: 
 phase 1 
 of careers, which went live on april 6, included staff and tech temp openings. 
 phase 2 
 is going live in september and will bring competitive hiring searches for academic faculty and research faculty (excluding gtri) positions into careers. 
 phase 3 , scheduled to launch in spring 2021, will include all remaining competitive hiring searches (students, gtri research faculty, and federal work study students) into careers. 
 careers is replacing disparate systems and processes with a centralized repository for managing recruitment and applicant data. it will facilitate communication and collaboration with applicants, managers, search committee members, faculty affairs, human resources, and usg colleagues. 
 beginning oct. 1, any new competitive faculty hiring searches (excluding gtri research faculty positions) will be required to be posted in careers. to ensure departments have the tools needed for phase 2 implementation, the enterprise resource planning (erp) training team has developed the mss: recruiting and hiring for faculty (non-gtri) training, which will cover: how to create job openings, manage applicants and interviews, and create job offers in careers for academic faculty and non-gtri research faculty. this training is strongly recommended for department hr / faculty affairs representatives and hiring managers. 
 register here 
 for any of the available trainings: 
 thursday, sept. 17 — 9 a.m. to noon 
 wednesday, sept. 23 — 9 a.m. to noon 
 thursday, oct. 8 — 9 a.m. to noon 
 to review previous mss recruiting and hiring for staff and tech temp trainings, view the 
 webinars 
 on media space. 
 for questions about careers or the recommended training, email 
 erp.training@gatech.edu . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 about oneusg connect 
 contact 
 gabrielle d. gaston 
 enterprise resource planning 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000