celebrate the fourth of july around atlanta 
 if you’re looking for a way to celebrate independence day around atlanta this weekend, look no further. 
 fourth of july fireworks seen from bobby dodd stadium at georgia tech. photo credit: danny karnik 
 jun 28, 2023 
 the time has come once again to celebrate our nation’s independence. in addition to local fireworks displays across the state, backyard barbeques, and time spent relaxing by the pool, there are plenty of special events taking place around the city this holiday weekend. 
 look up atlanta: saturday, july 1, 5 p.m. 
 centennial olympic park is the site of the largest fireworks show in the metro area, and the celebration of all things atlanta kicks off the holiday weekend on saturday, july 1. along with a performance from the atlanta symphony orchestra, the event will feature the inaugural georgia talent showcase allowing up-and-coming artists to perform on the look up atlanta stage. vendors will line appetite avenue, promoting the city’s culinary scene. 
 more information 
 fantastic fourth celebration at stone mountain: saturday, july 1 – wednesday, july 5, 9:30 p.m. 
 named to 
 reader’s digest ’s list of “america’s most spectacular fourth of july fireworks,” stone mountain park will host shows from saturday through wednesday. each night, the park’s new music across america light show, featuring immersive lighting, flames, lasers, and 250 color-changing drones, will be followed by a patriotic fireworks display. 
 more information 
 atlanta journal-constitution peachtree road race: tuesday, july 4, start times 6:25 – 8:30 a.m. 
 the 54th running of the ajc peachtree road race will begin on tuesday morning at lenox square as 50,000 participants blanket the streets. even if you’re not running, you can be a part of the iconic event by lining up along the 6.2-mile route. you can cheer on the racers from any point throughout the course –– ending at 10th st. and charles allen drive near piedmont park — including from three entertainment areas featuring local djs and bands. if you’re looking to get involved on race day, registration for volunteer opportunities remains open. 
 more information 
 community festivals and fireworks shows 
 fireworks will light up the metro area throughout the weekend as communities celebrate independence day with their own unique flare. 
 norcross' red, white & boom! 
 - monday, july 3, lillian webb park, 5 p.m. 
 woodstock’s july 4th spectacular festival 
 – tuesday, july 4, the park at city center, 10 a.m. – 10 p.m. 
 marietta’s 4th in the park 
 – tuesday, july 4, 
 glover park, 10 a.m. 
 pied piper parade in downtown decatur 
 – 
 tuesday, july 4, 
 6 p.m. 
 sandy springs stars and stripes fireworks celebration 
 – tuesday, july 4, city springs, 6 – 10 p.m. 
 chamblee’s july 4th summer concert series and fireworks show 
 – tuesday, july 4, city hall greenspace, 6:30 p.m. 
 independence day with the gwinnett stripers: tuesday, july 4, 7:05 p.m. 
 the atlanta braves will be in cleveland on the fourth of july, but you can get your fix of america’s pastime at coolray field in lawrenceville as the club’s aaa affiliate hosts the omaha storm chasers. a fireworks display will follow tuesday’s action, and the patriotic-themed jerseys worn during the game will be available via online auction. 
 more information 
 additional images 
 contact 
 steven gagliano 
 - communications officer 
 institute communications 
 email 
 steven.gagliano@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000