celebrate pride month at georgia tech 
 mark these dates on your calendar and join the lgbtqia resource center in celebrating pride month at tech. 
 jun 05, 2023 
 each june, through the lgbtqia resource center and campus partners, georgia tech celebrates pride month. originating as an annual commemoration of the 1969 stonewall uprising, today pride month serves as a reminder of the strength and resilience of the lgbtqia community. tegra myanna, director of the lgbtqia resource center, says it’s “an important celebration of community while serving as an opportunity for allies to reconnect to education and advocacy efforts to further lgbtqia inclusion.” 
 throughout the month, the georgia tech community is invited to engage in both in-person and online programs. to see a complete listing of events, and to learn more about pride month, visit 
 pride month at georgia tech . 
 inclusive leaders academy closing keynote presentation 
 wednesday, june 7 
 11 a.m. – 12:30 p.m. 
 online 
 kenji yoshino, the chief justice earl warren professor of constitutional law at nyu school of law, will discuss allyship, with insights from his latest book, 
 say the right thing: how to talk about identity, diversity, and justice . these include tips for navigating conversations across differences at a time of rapid social change and thoughts on how to move from unconsciously hurting people to consciously helping them. rsvp 
 here . 
 formalizing the whisper network: a conversation with the south’s first lgbtq+ business practice group 
 tuesday, june 13 
 noon – 1 p.m. 
 online 
 members of the law firm will share how morris, manning & martin’s lgbtq+ practice can help people connect with a network and referral sources that align with their values and needs, as well as provide legal advice and guidance. the team’s goal is to increase awareness of lgbtq+ business and legal resources for employees. 
 pride month stonewall community rally 
 saturday, june 17 
 1 – 3 p.m. 
 tech green 
 the community rally will be held in collaboration with atlanta pride and will feature several speakers. it is a celebration of pride month and a commemoration of the stonewall riots.  for more information, visit  pride.gatech.edu. 
 lgbtqia photoshoot 
 tuesday, june 20 
 11 a.m. – 2 p.m. 
 smithgall student services building 
 join the lgbtqia resource center for a special photoshoot opportunity. all photos taken will be used for lgbtqia evergreen marketing content. 
 pride progress: facts and stats on the lgbtqia student experience 
 friday, june 23 
 11:30 a.m. – 1 p.m. 
 online 
 staff from the lgbtqia resource center and institute diversity, equity, and inclusion will provide an overview of findings from data collected on lgbtqia students at tech. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 the lgbtqia resource center at georgia tech 
 contact 
 lgbtqia resource center 
 -  (404) 385-4780 
 email 
 lgbtqia@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000