celebrating pride month 
 june is designated pride month for the lgbtqia community to celebrate culture and community. 
 buzz is reflected in christen steele’s glasses as she admires the progress pride staircase at its grand opening in 2021. photo by allison carter 
 jun 08, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 june is designated pride month for the lgbtqia community to celebrate culture and community. it originated in the early 1970s with daylong and weekend commemorations of the stonewall riots of 1969. 
 “pride month is an important time for the lgbtqia community that represents identity, community, and ally solidarity as well as resistance to discrimination and violence,” said tegra myanna, director of the lgbtqia resource center. “each year, june reminds me of the importance of community and the resilience of lgbtqia people.” 
 this month, there are several ways to get involved in educational or advocacy efforts, and opportunities to engage with the lgbtqia resource center on campus. a few of those include: 
 safe space training 
 safe space is georgia tech’s lgbtqia ally training program for faculty, staff, affiliates, graduate students, and postdocs. 
 tuesday, june 14 
 8:30 a.m. – 12:30 p.m. 
 in person ( rsvp for location ; breakfast included) 
 queer coffeehouse 
 drop by the lgbtqia resource center (located in suite 140, smithgall student services building) to enjoy coffee and treats while getting to know others. 
 rsvp is requested . summer dates are: 
 tuesday, june 28 
 11 a.m. – noon 
 wednesday, july 20 
 11 a.m. – noon 
 pride erg picnic 
 bring your lunch and join affirmed @ gtri and pride erg as we close out pride month at georgia tech and celebrate with other lgbtqia employees. 
 tuesday, june 28 
 11:30 a.m. – 1:30 p.m. 
 ecocommons 
 trans 101 
 trans 101 is the lgbtqia resource center's introductory education program designed to provide participants with the knowledge and skills necessary to support transgender, gender-nonconforming, and gender questioning individuals at georgia tech. 
 rsvp to attend . 
 july 14 
 9:30 a.m. – noon 
 online 
 additional images 
 contact 
 kate curnow 
 student life 
 kristen bailey 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000