charitable campaign is still open 
 accepting contributions through nov. 16 
 oct 26, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 whether it provides groceries to a family in need or feeds an animal in a shelter — every dollar donated to the georgia state charitable contributions program (gasccp) helps a worthy cause. the gasccp is a benefit for state of georgia and university system employees that allows contributions to their charity of choice through payroll deductions or a one-time donation. the campaign is open through nov. 16. 
 since beginning in mid-september, georgia tech’s charitable campaign has raised more than $118,477.80 (71.8% of the goal), with 424 participants (59.1% of the goal). since 2017, an average of 717 tech employees have participated in the campaign each year. 
 there are more than 700 
 local, state, and national nonprofit organizations 
 to which you can contribute. you can support cancer research, provide food and shelter to the hungry and homeless, or assist children learning to read — along with hundreds of other ways to make a difference. 
 to contribute: 
 · log in to 
 oneusg connect 
 and select “make sccp contribution” on the “state charitable contributions program” button in the upper left of the employee self service screen. 
 · select “make charitable campaign pledge” and follow the instructions. 
 · choose “payroll deduction” to set up the amount you choose to pledge in equal installments. deductions will begin in january 2022. 
 · if you would rather download a 
 pledge form , you can complete it and submit with your check to your unit ambassador or to erick maxwell, the campaign chair, at mail code 0866. ( click here 
 to access the state charitable contributions program search tool where you can locate approved charities and their six-digit codes, which must be included on the pledge form.) 
 if you have questions, contact your unit ambassador or email the campaign team at 
 charitable@gatech.edu . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 victor rogers 
 institute communications 
 email 
 victor.rogers@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000