college of design dean steven french to step down july 31 
 steven french, dean of the college of design, has announced that he will step down as dean july 31, and return to teaching and research. 
 dean steven french, georgia tech college of design 
 jan 19, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 steven french, dean of the college of design, has announced that he will step down as dean july 31, returning to teaching and research in the school of city and regional planning. 
 “dean french’s vision and guidance have resulted in great progress for the college of design, both within the institute and beyond,” said steven mclaughlin, provost and executive vice president for academic affairs. “we are very grateful to dean french for his leadership within the college of design, the institute, and our community, and we wish him the very best as he returns to the faculty.” 
 under french’s direction, the college experienced a significant increase in enrollment, especially at the undergraduate level. this is due to innovative research- and technology-focused academic programs, which are unique among u.s. design colleges. new programs include the bachelor of science in music technology, the master of real estate development, and the minors in industrial design and in sustainable cities.  increased philanthropic support, including new endowed chairs and graduate fellowships, is also a credit to french’s tenure as dean. 
 french has served as dean of the college of design since 2013 and has held the john portman dean’s chair since 2014. in 2016, he led the transition from the college of architecture to the college of design. he joined tech in 1992 as the director of and a professor in the city and regional planning program. his expertise in sustainable urban development and natural hazard mitigation has contributed to georgia tech’s visibility in these areas. 
 the college will remain under dean french’s leadership while a search commences. details on the search process and the leadership transition will be announced later this spring. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 office of the provost 
 email 
 provostsoffice@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000