college of engineering duo named fellows of the national academy of inventors 
 siva sivakumar and natalie stingelin receive highest professional distinction for academic inventors 
 raghupathy “siva” sivakumar and natalie stingelin 
 dec 13, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 two georgia tech college of engineering professors are among this year’s fellows of the  national academy of inventors (nai) . 
 raghupathy “siva” sivakumar  and  natalie stingelin  will be inducted at the nai annual meeting this coming june in phoenix, arizona. election to nai’s fellowship program is the highest professional distinction for academic inventors. 
 sivakumar, georgia tech’s  first vice president of commercialization and chief commercialization officer , is being recognized for having demonstrated a highly prolific spirit of innovation in creating or facilitating outstanding inventions that have made a tangible impact on the quality of life, economic development, and welfare of society. he is a co-inventor on 22 issued patents, with 15 of them licensed to industry. 
 sivakumar holds the wayne j. holman chair in the  school of electrical and computer engineering , where he has served as a faculty member since 2000. 
 the nai is honoring stingelin for her significant contributions in the broader area of polymer physics and organic electronics and photonics. this includes the advancement of novel strategies that enable processing and design of soft electronic materials (such as organic semiconductors and inorganic / organic hybrid materials) with unique functional properties and the creation of innovative device architectures. 
 stingelin holds a joint appointment in the  school of materials science and engineering  and  school of chemical and biomolecular engineering . she is an internationally recognized authority in the polymer field and serves as the director of  georgia tech’s center for organic photonics and electronics . stingelin is also an initiative lead for  georgia tech’s institute of materials . 
 sivakumar and stingelin are among  164 honorees from more than 100 research universities and governmental and non-profit institutions worldwide . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 read more about siva sivakumar 
 read more about natalie stingelin 
 contact 
 jason maderer 
 college of engineering 
 maderer@gatech.edu 
 email 
 maderer@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000