college of sciences spotlights exemplary students with 2021 awards 
 six students gain special recognition for accomplishments, research in a variety of disciplines 
 may 07, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 one college of sciences student is a rising fourth-year, but she spent some of her non-research hours helping incoming first year students navigate the newness of georgia tech. another became the georgia tech hockey team’s first woman player in school history. (yes, georgia tech has a 
 hockey team .) yet another is helping a professor build an organic meteor database. 
 the six college of sciences students honored for end-of-school-year awards and scholarships offer a wide variety of accomplishments. join us in congratulating these winners of the 2021 college of sciences student awards: 
 2021 a. joyce nickelson and john c. sutherland undergraduate research award 
 presented to a student studying physics and mathematics. 
 endowment gift of jen nickelson and john sutherland. 
 luojia zhang 
 graduating spring 2021, physics and mathematics double major 
 research with  zhigang jiang  and  carlos sá de melo , school of physics 
 “landau quantization in tilted weyl semimetals with broken symmetry," journal of applied physics 129, 105107 (2021). 
 presented research at  american physical society , march 2021 
 2021 roger m. wartell and stephen e. brossette award 
 presented to a student who studies at the physics / math-biology interface. endowment gift of stephen brossette. 
 sophia wiesenfeld 
 rising fourth year student, chamblee charter high school graduate 
 biology major 
 research with  brian hammer , school of biological sciences, and  peter yunker , school of physics. 
 “glucose confers protection to  escherichia coli  against contact killing by  vibrio cholera ,”   sci. rep.  2021,  11 , 2935. 
 plus (peer-led undergraduate study ) leader, intro to physics; teaching assistant, evolutionary biology;  gt1000  team leader 
 2021 robert a. pierotti memorial scholarship 
 presented to a top graduating senior in the college. endowment gift of the family and friends of former dean robert pierotti 
 kalen patton 
 chattahoochee high school 
 mathematics and computer science double major 
 research with  lutz warnke , school of mathematics  –  “prague dimension of random graphs,”  arxiv: 2011.09459v1 
 research with  prasad tetali , schools of mathematics and computer science  –  “markov chain-based sampling for exploring rna secondary structure…”   math. comput. appl.  2020,  25 , 67. 
 runner-up,  love family foundation scholarship 
 2021 mehta phingbodhipakkiya memorial scholarship 
 presented to a top junior in the college of sciences. endowment gift of maranee phing 
 jennifer kim 
 south forsyth high school graduate 
 biochemistry major 
 research with  amanda stockton , school of chemistry and biochemistry, to develop an organic meteorite database 
 works with loren williams in georgia tech’s  center for the origin of life (cool) 
 2021 virginia c. and herschel v. clanton jr. scholarship 
 presented to a top pre-medical student in the college of sciences. 
 endowment gift of herschel v. clanton. 
 suraj modi 
 mountain view high school, lawrenceville, graduate 
 biology major 
 research with  frank rosenzweig , school of biological sciences 
 studying the integration of nutrient-sensing and pheromone-sensing pathways in  saccharomyces cerevisiae 
 ambassador,  stamps health services ; biology student advisory council 
 2021 cynthia l. bossart and james efron scholarship 
 presented to a top out-of-state junior in the college of sciences. 
 endowment gift of cynthia bossart and james efron. 
 eva erickson 
 rising third year student from eagan, minnesota 
 physics major 
 research with  daniel goldman , school of physics 
 presented “ centipede locomotion on complex terrain,” american physical society, 2021 ; and society for integrative and comparative biology, 2021 
 “tech hockey adds first ever female player to roster,”   technique , september 18, 2019 
 additional images 
 contact 
 renay san miguel 
 communications officer ii / science writer 
 college of sciences 
 404-894-5209 
 email 
 renay.san@cos.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000