commemorating and celebrating memorial day in atlanta 
 this weekend, to remember those who lost their lives in service, events in the tech community and around atlanta have been planned for the memorial day holiday. 
 student observing art display on campus. photo by allison carter 
 may 25, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 this weekend, to remember those who lost their lives in service, events in the tech community and around atlanta have been planned for the memorial day holiday. 
 on thursday, may 26, the veterans resource center 
 will host an open house 
 from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. in the veterans resource center, located in the biotech quad. there will be displays and information about tech’s military history. 
 an alumni recognition ceremony 
 will take place later that day from 6 to 8 p.m. at the alumni house. 
 with campus closed monday, may 30, the long weekend is a chance to both pay tribute to those who have served and to enjoy a day off. several events around atlanta will allow those who are staying in and around atlanta this weekend to do both. 
 brew at the zoo 
 saturday, may 28 
 zoo atlanta 
 for those of age, brew at the zoo opens up the zoo in the evening and lets you imbibe while enjoying zoo atlanta’s animals in their habitats. general admission tickets are still available. 
 atlanta jazz festival 
 may 28-30 
 piedmont park 
 this is the 45th annual celebration of one of the largest free jazz festivals in the country. enjoy music and festivities from artists from all over the world. 
 memorial day weekend at stone mountain park 
 may 27-30 
 stone mountain park 
 festivities at stone mountain park will include tributes to troops, plus four nights of fireworks and the lasershow spectacular. 
 summer bash at the children’s museum 
 may 28-29 
 children’s museum of atlanta 
 while there is always fun to be had at the museum, this weekend will include extra games, art activities, and dance parties. 
 local tributes 
 monday, may 30 
 several local cities will host tributes to those who have died in service to the united states. a few include: 
 alpharetta 
 norcross 
 roswell 
 additional images 
 contact 
 kristen bailey 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000