commemorating memorial day in atlanta 
 this weekend, to remember those who lost their lives in service, events in the tech community and around atlanta have been planned for the memorial day holiday. 
 the new veterans resource center opened in october 2020. president cabrera, right, and donors to the center attended the opening. 
 may 27, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 this weekend, to remember those who lost their lives in service, events in the tech community and around atlanta have been planned for the memorial day holiday. 
 on may 27, the veterans resource center will host the memorial day recognition from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. in the new veterans resource center, located in the biotech quad. there will be displays and information about tech’s military history. contact david ross at 
 dross25@gatech.edu 
 for information on attending 
 for more information, visit 
 veterans.gatech.edu / memorial-day . 
 events around atlanta: 
 jazz sunday at ebenezer 
 may 30, 1 p.m. 
 ebenezer baptist church will hold a socially distanced outdoor jazz concert featuring antonio allen. for more information, visit 
 here . 
 blue star museum program 
 all summer long 
 families of active military members can enjoy free admission at more than 2,000 venues nationwide, including 14 venues in the atlanta metro area. participating venues include children’s museums, art museums, history and science centers, zoos, and nature centers. for a list of venues in the atlanta area, visit 
 here . 
 college football hall of fame 
 memorial day weekend 
 active and retired military members can show an id at the box office for free admission. family members receive 20% off at the box office. for more information, visit 
 here . 
 movies on the lawn along lindbergh drive 
 may 1 to july 31 
 free movie screenings will take place weekly outdoors on the greenspace along lindbergh drive, around the lindbergh marta station. saturday, may 29, will feature a showing of 
 good morning, vietnam . for more information, visit 
 here . 
 alpharetta arts streetfest 
 memorial day weekend, 9 a.m. – 5 p.m. 
 the streetfest will feature more than 90 artists from across the u.s. artists represent a wide variety of mediums including mixed media, photography, pottery, jewelry, textiles, glass, wood, metal, and paper art. admission is free. for more information, visit 
 here . 
 georgia renaissance festival 
 through june 13, 10:30 a.m. – 6 p.m. 
 the festival will run through june 13, but for the memorial day weekend, active duty and retired military get in free, plus up to four family members for just $8 each. for more information, visit 
 here . 
 sunday funday markets in west end 
 through august 29, 1 – 5 p.m. 
 the markets will feature local artisans and businesses, and people can browse art, crafts, jewelry, handmade items, candles, soaps and lotions, and more. for more information, visit 
 here . 
 may fair 
 through memorial day weekend 
 held at the buford corn maze, this year the fair will include a carousel, magic shows, baby animals, and pony rides. for more information, visit 
 here . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 vanesa vargas 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000