cutting emissions isn’t enough. we need to scrub carbon directly from the air 
 new direct air capture center will leverage georgia tech’s leadership in a burgeoning field. 
 postdoctoral fellow poorandokht kashkouli, seated, discusses test data from their direct air capture rig with ryan lively, left, and chris jones. the system pulls air across filter materials to remove carbon dioxide. (photo: candler hobbs) 
 jan 19, 2023 
 — atlanta, ga 
 in 2015, nearly 200 countries agreed: they would reduce their emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases to limit warming of the earth’s atmosphere to well below 2 degrees celsius. 
 the paris agreement 
 actually aims for 1.5 degrees above pre-industrial levels to avoid 
 potential catastrophic changes to our climate . but it’s become increasingly clear to climate scientists and policymakers that just reducing emissions is not enough. 
 “we now know that we probably should have stopped putting massive amounts of co 2 
 in the air 10, 20, 30 years ago to prevent the climate from getting above 2 degrees c,” said 
 chris jones , a chemical engineer at georgia tech. “now we've waited so long to reduce our emissions that we need to develop technologies that are referred to as negative emissions technologies that remove co 2 
 from the atmosphere.” 
 jones was one of a handful of scientists who co-authored a 
 landmark national academies report in 2018 that outlined a variety of approaches to negative emissions. 
 agricultural practices and forest management are options — essentially using nature’s ability to grab carbon dioxide out of the air and lock it away in plants and soil. but jones said we’ll need quicker and more direct approaches. 
 “we could plant billions of trees to do this, but there's not enough available land. and the trees don't grow fast enough for us to do this quickly enough to slow global warming at the rate required,” said jones, john f. brock iii school chair in the 
 school of chemical and biomolecular engineering (chbe) . “that's where direct air capture comes in: it's a chemical engineering way of designing a process that takes co 2 
 out of the air.” 
 read the full story on the college of engineering website. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 joshua stewart 
 college of engineering 
 email 
 jstewart@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000