daren hubbard to depart georgia tech, join princeton university 
 daren hubbard has announced he will join princeton university as vice president for information technology and chief information officer. 
 nov 21, 2023 
 daren hubbard has announced he will join princeton university as vice president for information technology and chief information officer (cio). 
 hubbard joined georgia tech in september 2020, as vice president for information technology and cio. in this role, he has 
 provided vision, leadership, and oversight in the development and implementation of information technology. he has been responsible for establishing the strategic direction of information technology resources, including a governance strategy, as well as supporting information users by determining trends and technologies needed to advance the institute’s academic and research mission. 
 “daren’s contributions to georgia tech have been invaluable, and while we bid farewell to a brilliant leader, we also celebrate the lasting mark he has left on our institution. i extend my best wishes for continued success and a huge thank you for his unwavering dedication to advancing technology and innovation at georgia tech,” said shantay bolton, executive vice president for administration and finance. “as we embark on this transition, we remain committed to upholding the standards of excellence that define our institution and eagerly anticipate the continued growth of our technology landscape." 
 as princeton’s chief strategist and operational leader of the office of information technology (oit), the vice president and cio is responsible for providing strategic leadership to identify, develop, and implement information systems, services, and the technical infrastructure that enables the princeton community to achieve its mission to advance learning through research and teaching of unsurpassed quality. the oit organization has a staff of over 300 people working across six core functions: the information security office, enterprise infrastructure services, software and application services, the service management office, the project and technology consulting office, and operations and planning. 
 at princeton university, hubbard will be responsible for successfully transitioning oit to a new organizational structure reporting to the executive vice president. 
 prior to joining georgia tech, hubbard 
 worked for wayne state since 1999 and was responsible for the university’s computing and networking facilities, enterprise software applications, learning management environments, high-performance research computing, information security, and information technology support services. 
 hubbard’s last day in his role at tech is dec. 31. details about interim leadership and the search for a successor will be announced soon. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 rachael pocklington 
 institute communications 
 email 
 rpocklington@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000