david bridges receives fulbright specialist award to slovak republic at digital coalition 
 program pairs u.s. academics and professionals with institutions abroad to share expertise, strengthen relations, hone skills, gain international experience, and learn about other cultures. 
 apr 26, 2024 
 the u.s. department of state and the fulbright foreign scholarship board are pleased to announce that david bridges, vice president of the georgia institute of technology's enterprise innovation institute, has received a fulbright specialist program award. 
 bridges, who was named  fulbright specialist in february of 2024 ,  will complete a project at the digital coalition in the slovak republic that aims to exchange knowledge and establish partnerships benefiting participants, institutions, and communities both in the u.s. and overseas through a variety of educational and training activities within public administration. 
 bridges is one of over 400 u.s. citizens who share expertise with host institutions abroad through the fulbright specialist program each year. recipients of fulbright specialist awards are selected on the basis of academic and professional achievement, demonstrated leadership in their field, and their potential to foster long-term cooperation between institutions in the u.s. and abroad. 
 the fulbright program is the flagship international educational exchange program sponsored by the u.s. government and is designed to build lasting connections between the people of the united states and the people of other countries. the fulbright program is funded through an annual appropriation made by the u.s. congress to the u.s. department of state. participating governments and host institutions, corporations, and foundations around the world also provide direct and indirect support to the program, which operates in over 160 countries worldwide. 
 since its establishment in 1946, the fulbright program has given more than 400,000 students, scholars, teachers, artists, and scientists the opportunity to study, teach and conduct research, exchange ideas, and contribute to finding solutions to shared international concerns. 
 fulbrighters address critical global issues in all disciplines, while building relationships, knowledge, and leadership in support of the long-term interests of the united states. fulbright alumni have achieved distinction in many fields, including 60 who have been awarded the nobel prize, 88 who have received pulitzer prizes, and 39 who have served as a head of state or government. 
 for further information about the fulbright program or the u.s. department of state, please visit  eca.state.gov / fulbright  or contact the bureau of educational and cultural affairs press office by telephone 202.632.6452 or e-mail  eca-press@state.gov . 
 contact 
 péralte c. paul 
 peralte@gatech.edu 
 404.316.1210 
 email 
 peralte@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000