davis-nozemack named executive chief of staff and associate provost for office of the provost 
 davis-nozemack will assume the role effective jan. 1. 
 karie davis-nozemack& 
 nov 28, 2023 
 provost steve mclaughlin has named karie davis-nozemack as executive chief of staff and associate provost for the office of the provost, effective jan. 1. 
 a member of the georgia tech faculty since 2011, davis-nozemack currently serves as interim associate dean for academic programs and associate professor of business law and ethics in the scheller college of business. as interim associate dean, she oversees the scheller undergraduate, full-time mba, evening mba, executive mba, and other interdisciplinary programs. 
 in the new role, davis-nozemack will promote and advise the office of the provost on administrative and institutional matters and develop actions plans on policies and procedures, operational effectiveness, and communications on issues that advance the institute’s priorities, goals, and outcomes set forth in the institute strategic plan. she will serve as a key campus collaborator on executive initiatives and as a liaison and representative on campus committees and provide strategic oversight to the provost’s staff. 
 “karie’s time at tech has proven her to be an effective leader, scholar, educator, and advocate for faculty, staff, and students,” said mclaughlin. “her background and strategic leadership through the years on a range of issues important to our community give me great confidence and i look forward to working with her in this new role.” 
 since 2021, davis-nozemack has led georgia tech’s faculty governance as faculty executive board chair, collaborating with fifteen standing committees and serving as a faculty representative on several institute committees. notably, she played a key role in advocating for faculty in the adoption of recent university system of georgia (usg) policy changes related to evaluation and post-tenure review, serving as a convener across usg institutions and helping to build local consensus among georgia tech faculty in implementing the new policies. she also co-led revisions to the academic freedom and academic program review sections of the faculty handbook. 
 “serving our brilliant colleagues and students has been the most fulfilling work of my career,“ said davis-nozemack. “this new role is an opportunity to continue and advance that work.” 
 davis-nozemack’s time at tech has also seen her lauded for her self-professed love of teaching. she has received numerous awards and recognitions, including the brady family award for teaching excellence, the center for teaching and learning curriculum innovation award, and graduate student government association’s faculty of the year. she is also a two-time scheller professor of the year honoree and a ten-time course survey teaching effectiveness award winner. her research focuses on legal and ethical mechanisms for constraining opportunistic managerial behavior, including tax whistleblowers, tax compliance strategies, and fiduciary duty. 
 davis-nozemack holds a bachelor of arts in political science and history from emory university, a juris doctor from washington and lee university, and a master of taxation from georgia state university. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 office of the provost 
 email 
 provostsoffice@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000