dean search begins for scheller college of business 
 search firm will host town hall events for scheller faculty, staff, and students. 
 scheller college of business, atlanta, ga 
 feb 16, 2023 
 — atlanta, ga 
 provost steve w. mclaughlin has convened a search committee tasked with selecting the new dean for georgia tech’s scheller college of business, following the 
 announcement 
 that dean maryam alavi will step down on june 30. 
 the search will be chaired by charles isbell, dean of the college of computing and the john p. imlay jr. chair. georgia tech has retained the services of the executive search firm 
 heidrick & struggles. 
 “the new dean of the scheller college of business will lead a dynamic and diverse group of faculty, staff and students who are thinking creatively about business and will have an exciting job ahead of them as the college continues its path of excellence, scholarship, and leadership,” said mclaughlin. “i thank dean isbell and the members of the search committee for their service, and i encourage members of the scheller community to engage in the search process.” 
 college engagement: 
 heidrick & struggles will lead town hall events for faculty, staff, and students. these events will engage the scheller community and seek the community's feedback on the preferred qualifications of the next dean. the search firm will also share details about the search process. town hall events will offer in-person and virtual participation where possible. 
 faculty town hall:   friday, feb. 24, 1 p.m.,  scheller college of business room 314 .   join via zoom 
 staff town hall:   friday, feb. 24, 2 p.m.,  scheller college of business room 316 .   join via zoom 
 faculty / staff town hall:   thursday, march 2, 12 p.m.   join via zoom   (virtual only). 
 student town hall:  tuesday, march 7, 11 a.m.   join via zoom   (virtual only). 
 scheller community members who are not able to attend town hall events are encouraged to share their feedback with the search firm by emailing 
 gtbusinessdean@heidrick.com . 
 more on the search: 
 the search is open to both external and internal candidates at georgia tech. this position reports to the provost of georgia tech. details on the search, including the search committee roster, position description, and link to apply, will be posted to 
 provost.gatech.edu / scheller-college-business-dean-search . 
 inquiries and nominations are invited and should be sent to the heidrick & struggles team at 
 gtbusinessdean@heidrick.com . 
 while applications and nominations will be received until the dean is selected, interested parties are encouraged to submit their application materials by april 1. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 scheller college dean alavi to step down june 30 
 contact 
 inquiries should be sent to the heidrick & struggles team at 
 gtbusinessdean@heidrick.com . 
 email 
 gtbusinessdean@heidrick.com 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000