dean search begins for college of engineering 
 the college of engineering search is an internal search open to tenured faculty at georgia tech. 
 tech tower 
 oct 10, 2020 
 — atlanta, ga 
 provost steven w. mclaughlin has convened a search committee tasked with selecting the new dean for the college of engineering. 
 the search will fill the vacancy left by mclaughlin following his appointment as provost and executive vice president for academic affairs. laurence jacobs, professor and associate dean for academic affairs in the school of civil and environmental engineering, has been named interim dean of the college of engineering and will continue to serve until the post is filled. 
 the search for the new dean of the college of engineering will be chaired by ayanna howard, professor and chair in the school of interactive computing. michael toney, director of academic administration, will serve as search director. 
 to expedite the search and transition process, mclaughlin elected to conduct an internal only search. given the size and depth of leadership experience within the college of engineering, the search is limited to tenured members of the georgia tech faculty. 
 “the college and institute are at a critical and time-sensitive period in our operational and scientific response to the coronavirus crisis and i thank larry jacobs for his leadership during this time of transition,” said mclaughlin. “my many years as part of the college of engineering community gives me full confidence that we will find our next leader within our current faculty and continue to lead as a top engineering program in the nation.” 
 a virtual town hall for faculty, staff, and students to learn about the search process and timelines, and to provide feedback on the characteristics of ideal candidates has been scheduled for: 
 tuesday, october 20 at 11 a.m. 
 ( access the bluejeans event ) 
 more on the search: 
 nominations can be sent to 
 provostsoffice@gatech.edu . visit the 
 dean search site 
 for the position description, search committee roster, and ongoing search updates. an application link will be also be made available, once finalized. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 college of engineering dean search 
 contact 
 michael toney, director, academic administration 
 office of the provost 
 email 
 michael.toney@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000