designing the campus of the future 
 planning is underway to develop the comprehensive campus plan (ccp) – a living document that will inform how campus space can be utilized to support the growing and changing campus community for the next 10 years and beyond. 
 sep 14, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 planning is underway to develop the 
 comprehensive campus plan 
 (ccp) – a living document that will inform how campus space can be utilized to support the growing and changing campus community for the next 10 years and beyond. once complete, the plan will define a vision and strategy for the best use of the institute’s lands, both within and beyond the current core campus. 
 “the creation of the comprehensive campus plan will guide campus development and capital investments on and around the atlanta campus for the future,” said maria cimilluca, vice president for infrastructure and sustainability. “this is significant because it will also strengthen georgia tech as an anchor institution for the neighboring communities and atlanta as a whole.” 
 steeped in the institute’s strategic plan and commitment to people, research, and teaching, the ccp will demonstrate how georgia tech will lead and inspire by example in creating a roadmap for the sustainable development and management of the campus and surrounding communities. 
 key strategic principles of the ccp include: 
 student-first experience: 
 enhance the urban ecological landscape to create optimal places where students can thrive. 
 access and circulation: 
 support universal access and promote physical and environmental wellness through intentional design for active modes of transport. 
 community: 
 improve the human condition and cultivate a safe, healthy, and equitable urban fabric through the development of dynamic community partnerships. 
 connectivity : champion adaptive infrastructure that actively supports innovative methods and places for learning. 
 transformative campus: 
 foster resiliency and radiate influence through sustainable development strategies that meet emerging and evolving campus needs. 
 the project team is led by members from infrastructure and sustainability’s planning, design, and construction team. the ccp will be developed in collaboration with individuals from georgia tech’s campus and the atlanta community. through january 2023, the team will be working to develop plan concepts by: 
 conducting community outreach (internal and external). 
 forecasting campus needs based on 10-year scenarios. 
 developing the plan vision. 
 creating an interactive gis-based decision-making tool. 
 beginning next week, campus community members are invited to learn more about the development of the ccp, including how they can contribute to and stay involved with this transformative project. 
 the first in-person open house will take place on tuesday, sept. 20, from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. on tech walkway. in addition, a virtual option will also be offered on thursday, sept. 22, from 11 a.m. to noon via zoom 
 https: / / gatech.zoom.us / j / 95369936919 . 
 in the meantime, the campus community is invited to participate in an online visioning exercise to help inform classroom planning. please take a few minutes to provide your thoughts at 
 https: / / padlet.com / sdowling22 / 43ejj7c8s1q746z9 . you may use the password “yellow jackets” to access the board. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 comprehensive campus plan 
 help design the campus of the future (in-person event) 
 help design the campus of the future (virtual event) 
 contact 
 tameka wimberly-jones 
 senior campus planner 
 infrastructure and sustainability 
 additional information 
 georgia tech’s last comprehensive campus plan in 2004 guided more than $1.85 billion in capital investment and enabled the transformation of the campus learning environment. it helped guide the development of several major facilities and projects, including: 
 clough undergraduate learning commons 
 carbon neutral energy solutions lab 
 roger a. and helen b. krone engineered biosystems building 
 georgia tech police department building 
 john lewis student center and stamps commons 
 the evolution of technology square 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000