distractions and diversions for election week 
 with many already stressed about the outcome, it’s important to find ways to distract yourself and destress, not only leading up to tuesday, but in the days that follow as well. 
 red and blue hands raised 
 nov 02, 2020 
 — atlanta, ga 
 election day is tuesday, nov. 3, though experts are increasingly warning that we won’t know the results of some of the races — including the race for president — until several days afterwards. 
 with many already stressed about the outcome, it’s important to find ways to distract yourself and de-stress, not only leading up to tuesday, but in the days that follow as well. 
 q chats: lgbtqia discussion groups 
 various days 
 every week, the lgbtqia resource center hosts q chats, where groups of lgbtqia+ students can speak virtually with others in their community. different intersections of groups include men’s and women’s groups; queer people of color; and trans, gender non-conforming, and gender-questioning groups. click the link above to learn about when each group is meeting and register for a q chat. 
 7th national collegiate paper art triennial 
 through nov. 13 
 robert c. williams museum of papermaking 
 the paper art triennial is celebrating its 20th anniversary with a collection of 37 works in the field of papermaking, as created by students from 15 universities around the world. the museum is open all day monday through friday, but visitors must first make a reservation at 
 paper.gatech.edu . 
 free virtual fitness 
 nov. 2 – 7 
 online 
 the campus recreaton center is offering free virtual classes through nov. 7. use promo code gtstudentfall2020 to sign up. 
 ramblin’ wreck the vote tie-dye 
 nov. 2, 4 
 smithgall student services (flag) building 
 the office of student diversity programs will be passing out tie-dye materials for you to make your own election-themed t-shirt. material pickup will be both the day before and after election day so you can de-stress and celebrate voting in style. only the first 120 people who register will get the shirt and materials, so do so beforehand 
 here . 
 gostem career path series with president cabrera 
 tuesday, nov. 3, 4 – 5 p.m. 
 online 
 president ángel cabrera will speak as part of a series about career paths for hispanics and latinos in stem. 
 omed post-election kickback 
 wednesday, nov. 4, 10 a.m. – 3:30 p.m. 
 chapin building 
 the office of minority education and development (omed) will be hosting a post-election kickback the day after election day. students are welcome to stop by and grab free food, listen to music, or even hop on the open mic or dialogue with others. 
 indoor cycling 
 wednesday, nov. 4, 4:30 – 5:15 p.m. 
 campus recreation center 
 hop on an indoor bike and cycle at your own pace. you can work your way through climbs, sprints, and flat roads. space is limited, so click the link above to register. 
 conversations with cabrera featuring enric sala 
 wednesday, nov. 4, 6 –7 p.m. 
 online 
 join president ángel cabrera in conversation with conservationist enric sala, current national geographic explorer-in-residence and author of the nature of nature: why we need the wild, which makes a clear case for why protecting nature is our best health insurance, and why it makes economic sense. 
 scpc presents: claymation! 
 wednesday, nov. 4, 6 – 8:45 p.m. 
 exhibition hall, midtown ii, or online 
 if you’ve ever wanted to learn how to make your own claymation figure, now’s your chance. scpc will provide all of the materials and instructions; participants can follow along in person or virtually. reserve your ticket to the event 
 here . 
 tactile thursdays: petal fold book 
 thursday, nov. 5, 4 – 5p.m. 
 online 
 the library hosts this workshops where you will “unfold” the technique to making a blooming book that uses paper folding. you will make your own unique book with colorful, patterned paper. 
 fall flicks: 'parasite' 
 friday, nov 6, 7 p.m. 
 bobby dodd stadium 
 enjoy the last showing in the fall flicks series on the lawn of grant field. 
 saturday morning cartoons 
 saturday, nov. 7, doors at 11:30 a.m., cartoons begin at noon 
 ferst center for the arts 
 enjoy classic looney tunes cartoons with bugs bunny, elmer fudd, porky pig, sylvester, tweety bird, and more. take a break from studying, stroll over in your sweats, and settle in to a comfy seat at the ferst center. 
 view other upcoming arts events . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 grace wyner 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000