don’t forget to register your youth programs 
 regardless of whether the program is in-person or virtual, the youth programs policy still applies. 
 youth programs 
 aug 30, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 it’s back-to-school season for the georgia tech community and the greater atlanta area, and minors are excited to participate in the many youth programs and extracurricular activities that georgia tech has to offer. 
 last year, many programs successfully pivoted to a virtual setting due to the pandemic and turned out to be a great success. this year, some programs plan to return to an in-person setting, while others plan to continue the success that was found in a virtual setting. 
 regardless of whether the program is in-person or virtual, the 
 youth programs policy 
 still applies. below are the requirements for hosting a youth program. 
 for more information and resources on youth programs, visit 
 youthprograms.gatech.edu . if you have questions, 
 contact sally robertson . 
 all youth programs require: 
 registration form 
 the registration form must be submitted no less than 30 days prior to the start of the program. 
 the registration form can be found on the youth programs website. 
 background checks 
 background checks are run through hr. 
 they are required for all those in direct contact with minors. 
 even in an online setting, a videoconference or an email are still considered direct contact. 
 training 
 training is administered through canvas for employees and through the training request form for students and non-employees. 
 training is required for all those in direct contact with minors. 
 staff and volunteer code of conduct 
 all staff and volunteers, whether in direct contact or not, are required to sign the staff and volunteer code of conduct. 
 there is a separate code of conduct specifically for virtual programs. 
 mandatory reporter 
 the mandatory reporter requirements apply for virtual and in-person programs. if you see something, say something. 
 supervision ratios 
 virtual programs use the rule of three, meaning there are always at least three people present with the minor(s): one child and two adults. 
 in-person programs must use the american camp association supervision ratios. 
 parental release form 
 for all programs, every participant must have a parent or guardian sign and complete the parental release form. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 sally robertson 
 office of the general counsel 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000