a dream becomes reality 
 heidi davari turned her childhood passion for architecture into a georgia tech master’s degree. 
 outside of the classroom, heidi davari enjoys many creative endeavors, including photography, baking, fashion, and jewelry making. 
 may 02, 2023 
 since she was a child, heidi davari has loved architecture. her parents also love architecture and took her with them to open houses to admire the designs. “it really created a passion for architecture in me, and i still enjoy going to open houses today,” said davari, who grew up in sugar hill, georgia, near lake lanier. “at one point, a lot of the realtors in my area knew me because of my frequent visits.” 
 davari’s childhood interest turned into a professional goal, and now she is receiving a master’s degree in architecture. she also earned a bachelor’s in architecture from georgia tech in 2021. 
 highlights from her studies at tech include a residential internship in florida and a studio project in savannah, georgia, where the students worked on a 150-acre site and designed a building in detail. 
 outside of the classroom, she enjoys many creative endeavors, including photography, baking, fashion, and jewelry making. “i love many types of design,” she said. “a good architect is creative, and i am always trying to work on and improve that skill — and have a lot of fun while doing it.” 
 after graduating, she will work full time at an architectural firm and also work on getting her architectural license. 
 davari will miss the people she has met at tech. “it is such a diverse place with amazing students and professors. i learned as much from my peers as i did from my professors, and i will miss seeing everyone daily.” 
 her advice to current students is to continue working hard but find time for other activities they enjoy. “it is ok to take breaks and do things that make you happy,” she said. “even though i did my undergraduate at georgia tech and went straight into the master’s program, time goes by quicker than you might think.” 
 davari’s parents and her boyfriend will join her for commencement, and a large group of family and friends will celebrate with her after the ceremony, which takes place friday, may 5, at 3 p.m. in bobby dodd stadium. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 school of architecture 
 contact 
 victor rogers 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000