early-career astrobiologists gather for abgradcon 2018 
 abgradcon 2018 showcases georgia tech’s leadership in astrobiology research and education. 
 jun 04, 2018 
 — atlanta, ga 
 georgia tech ph.d. students and postdocs host abgradcon 2018 this week. abgradcon stands for astrobiology graduate conference. the popular gathering provides a unique setting for attendees to share research, collaborate, and network. 
 the meeting is for and by early-career scientists addressing the broad questions of astrobiology: how did life start? where else does life exist? how could humans search for life outside earth? 
 abgradcon 2018 brings to the fore georgia tech’s standing in astrobiology research and education. georgia tech leads in training scientists who will direct space exploration in the 21st century. 
 organizers 
 george tan 
 chairs the organizing committee. he is a ph.d. student of 
 amanda stockton , in the school of chemistry and biochemistry. working with tan 
 were more than a dozen other ph.d. students or postdoctoral researchers . 
 organizers expect 96 attendees: 72 from the u.s. and 24 from overseas, tan says. they come from nine countries: brazil, canada, czech republic, germany, india, japan, mexico, united kingdom, and united states. 
 the program includes 
 an evening for the public , which features 
 astronaut lawrence delucas . 
 “we have a big astrobiology community at tech. this is the perfect opportunity for us to network with students and postdocs with similar interests. i also learned a lot about planning conferences,” says 
 adriana lozoya . she is a ph.d. student of 
 nicholas hud , in the school of chemistry and biochemistry. hud is also a member of the 
 parker h. petit institute for bioengineering and bioscience 
 (ibb). 
 “it’s been a great experience getting all the moving parts to work to make this conference exciting and worthwhile for all attendees,” says 
 marcus bray . he is a ph.d. student of 
 jennifer glass , in the school of earth and atmospheric sciences. glass is also an ibb member. 
 funding 
 major funding for the meeting came from the 
 nasa astrobiology institute . other sponsors are: 
 acs earth and space chemistry 
 earth-life science institute 
 georgia tech astrobiology 
 georgia tech college of sciences 
 georgia tech institute for electronics and nanotechnology 
 john templeton foundation 
 nature publishing group 
 simons foundation 
 “we can’t thank our sponsors enough,” tan says. “their generosity markedly enhanced our ability to prepare the best possible program and accommodate close to a hundred participants.” 
 “i look forward to the many informal discussions over the week,” says 
 rebecca rapf . she is a postdoctoral researcher with 
 kevin wilson 
 at lawrence berkeley national lab. “i’m sure they will lead to productive collaborations and long-term friendships with people who will be our peers throughout our careers.” 
 additional images 
 related links 
 astrobiology rising at georgia tech 
 contact 
 a. maureen rouhi, ph.d. 
 director of communications 
 college of sciences 
 email 
 maureen.rouhi@cos.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000