earth month features sustainability events 
 april is earth month with a full calendar of events 
 open to the campus community. 
 apr 04, 2024 
 april is 
 earth month 
 at georgia tech. coordinated by the office of sustainability and hosted by partners across campus, it extends the institute’s observance of earth day (april 22) by showcasing campus sustainability efforts and providing opportunities for students, faculty, and staff to learn and take action. 
 this year’s earth month holds special significance, as georgia tech will soon publish its first climate action plan, a road map for reaching net-zero greenhouse gas emissions. 
 “earth month presents us with a unique time to honor and safeguard our environment together,” said vanessa suarez, sustainability coordinator in the office of sustainability. “it's an opportunity for all of us to be inspired and make a positive difference, both locally and globally; a reminder that collective changes yield significant impact.” 
 events will be hosted by organizations and departments across campus during the month to learn, celebrate, and share best practices. 
 featured event: earth day sustainable org fair and celebration 
 wednesday, april 17, 11 a.m. – 1 p.m., the kendeda building for innovative sustainable design 
 this signature event will feature sustainability-focused departments and student organizations, earth month byo t-shirt screen printing and other textiles, and free king of pops popsicles. sign up 
 here 
 to table. 
 earth month bird walk – lullwater (emory) 
 friday, april 5, 10:25 a.m. – 12:35 p.m., lullwater preserve, 1463 clifton road 
 hosted by georgia tech birdwatchers with support from the office of sustainability, attendees can observe and learn about birds with club experts at the scenic lullwater preserve near emory’s campus. binoculars provided. 
 for registration and additional information, click 
 here . 
 tech beautification day 
 saturday, april 6, 8:30 a.m. – 12:30 p.m. tech green 
 come get your hands dirty to make our campus green and beautiful at the 25th annual tech beautification day, a volunteering event hosted by the student government association and 
 infrastructure and sustainability . the event is capped at 300 volunteers, so sign up today! 
 for registration and additional information, click 
 here . 
 global media festival film screening: ‘bigger than us’ documentary + live q&a 
 sunday, april 7, 2:30 – 5 p.m., john lewis student center, cypress theater 
 bigger than us 
 follows melati wijsen, an 18-year-old indonesian activist fighting plastic pollution in her country as she expands her impact by collaborating with activists across the globe. the screening will be followed by a live virtual discussion with the film’s director, flore vasseur. 
 this event is part of the 
 global media festival, 
 taking place march 29 – april 7 and exploring themes around the un sustainable development goals. the festival is co-sponsored by the school of modern languages; the atlanta global studies center; the school of literature, media, and communication; and the brook byers institute for sustainable systems. 
 for registration and additional information, click 
 here . 
 ecocommons tour 
 wednesday, april 10, noon – 1 p.m., the kendeda building for innovative sustainable design 
 the 80-acre ecocommons is one of georgia tech’s most impressive sustainability features. institute landscape architect jason gregory will lead attendees on a tour to learn about the native performance landscape adjacent to the kendeda building. 
 carbon reduction challenge info session – virtual 
 thursday, april 11, 11 – 11:50 a.m., online 
 the carbon reduction challenge is a competition focused on empowering students to become part of the climate change solution. join the ray c. anderson center for sustainable business for a virtual information session to learn more about participating in the challenge this summer. 
 for registration and more information, click 
 here . 
 climate fresk workshops 
 thursday, april 11, noon – 3:30 p.m., kendeda seminar room 118 
 monday, april 15, 11 a.m. – 2:30 p.m., kendeda seminar room 118 
 thursday, april 19, 10 a.m. – 1:30 p.m., o’keefe building, third floor, sunroom conference room* 
 climate fresk is an internationally recognized workshop based on scientific reports from the intergovernmental panel on climate change that teaches the fundamental causes and effects of climate change through a collaborative and engaging game. the office of sustainability will host three fresk workshops throughout april. 
 *the workshop on april 19 is co-sponsored by the georgia tech french club and will be held partially in french. 
 for more information and registration, click 
 here . 
 bbiss seminar series: neha kumar 
 thursday, april 11, 3 – 4 p.m., hybrid event – online and bbiss offices, 760 spring street, suite 160 
 neha kumar is an associate professor in the school of international affairs and the school of interactive computing at georgia tech. she will present a new paper that describes opportunities for human–computer interaction to reimagine the design of sociotechnical systems toward advancing sustainable, just, and humane futures. 
 for more information and the event link, click 
 here . 
 atlanta global studies symposium: languages of sustainability and the global south 
 friday, april 12, 8:30 a.m. – 7 p.m., main auditorium, technology square research building 
 hosted by the atlanta global studies center and with support from the emory university office of global strategy and initiatives, the symposium will present initiatives that promote global education, language learning, sustainable development, and community engagement. partners, faculty, students, community organizers, k-12 teachers, and the public are welcome. 
 for more information and registration, click 
 here . 
 frontiers in science: climate action 
 thursday, april 18, 9 a.m. – 5:30 p.m., the dalney building 
 the college of sciences will convene 100 campus and community stakeholders to discuss groundbreaking research on climate change, challenges, and solutions. more than 25 
 speakers and panelists 
 from across georgia tech and atlanta will share their work and ideas to address major climate and community challenges. frontiers will also feature leadership keynotes, a 
 student video showcase 
 with scholarships, networking lunch and reception, and a strategic energy institute interdisciplinary 
 seed grant challenge 
 for assistant professors. 
 attendance is by invitation, and registration is limited. 
 to suggest participants, please contact: events@cos.gatech.edu. 
 carbon reduction challenge spring showcase 
 friday, april 19, 2 – 4 p.m., the kendeda building for innovative sustainable design 
 eight teams composed of students enrolled in earth and atmospheric sciences 3111, “energy, environment, and society,” will present their final semester-long carbon reduction challenge projects. the projects show more than 9 million pounds of carbon dioxide reductions annually while generating yearly savings of over $500 million in energy bills and carbon sequestration. attendees can enjoy snacks and drinks and vote for their favorite project. 
 for more information and registration, click 
 here . 
 sustain-x hangout 
 tuesday, april 23, 3 p.m. – 4 p.m., hybrid / scheller college of business, room 4426 
 a partnership between the 
 ray c. anderson center for sustainable business 
 and 
 create-x , sustain-x is a sustainability next and georgia tech strategic plan project. with events occurring on the fourth tuesday of every month, this session will examine social and environmental entrepreneurship and how to access resources for projects. 
 for more information and to register, click 
 here . 
 interdisciplinary and critical approaches to sustainability 
 wednesday, april 24, 2024, 8:30 a.m. – 6 p.m. 
 the atlanta global studies center will present a conference entitled “sustainability in a planet of diverse knowledges and persistent inequalities.” the event features georgia tech faculty panels   and keynotes from nelson maldonado-torres and jessica hernandez on “colonial and decolonial sustainabilities” and “indigenous science: from local to global context,” respectively. 
 for more information and registration, click 
 here . 
 bbiss seminar series – fani boukouvala 
 thursday, april 25, 3 – 4 p.m., hybrid / bbiss offices, 760 spring street, suite 160 
 fani boukouvala, assistant professor in the school of chemical and biomolecular engineering, will present a talk about a new approach for chemical conversion of waste plastics to their original raw materials, including a detailed process modeling of a chemical reactor validated by experimental data, and proceed with simulation of an entire pilot scale facility. 
 for the event link, click 
 here . 
 additional events, volunteer opportunities, and campaigns are posted on the 
 earth month calendar .  submit your event to be featured via the earth month 
 form . 
 contact 
 abby bower 
 sustainability program support coordinator 
 office of sustainability | sustain.gatech.edu 
 infrastructure and sustainability 
 email 
 abby.bower@sustain.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000