earth day events abound next week 
 virtual and in-person events and activities will be held for students, faculty, and staff, promoting actions, ideas, and practices that will drive positive change for the planet. 
 spring flowers outside the kendeda building. photo by allison carter. 
 apr 16, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 every year, earth day is celebrated to raise awareness about the importance of protecting our environment. the tech community will be celebrating earth day this year throughout the week of april 19 – 22. virtual and in-person events and activities will be held for students, faculty, and staff, promoting actions, ideas, and practices that will drive positive change for the planet. 
 as part of the weeklong celebration, the tech community was invited to submit designs that encapsulate this year’s theme, which echoes a central tenet of the new institute strategic plan: amplify impact. civil engineering graduate connor booth won the contest with a design that features a hand with different ecosystems inside. 
 in-person events will require face coverings and social distancing, and some events will require time-ticket registration. students are encouraged to complete a daily symptom check and participate in the covid-19 testing program before participating in the events. 
 schedule of events ( view full event details and updates ) 
 monday, april 19 
 earth week @ the ecocommons (in-person) 
 9:30 – 10:30 a.m., ecocommons 
 the new ecocommons opening will be celebrated during a vine-cutting ceremony. 
 rsvp . 
 katharine wilkinson — all we can save: truth, courage, and solutions for the climate crisis (virtual) 
 5 – 6 p.m. 
 katharine wilkinson, author and climate change activist, will have a conversation with denise quarles, chief city executive of siemens’s southeast region, and chandra farley of partnership for southern equity. the topic will be the anthology co-edited by wilkinson and atanna johnson: 
 all we can save: truth, courage, and solutions for the climate crisis . 
 register 
 here . 
 hard to recycle materials dropoff and clothing swap 
 april 19 – 22, 10 a.m. – 4 p.m., lower level of the kendeda building 
 people can donate items such as bicycles; small appliances including mini fridges, desk lamps, and coffee makers; and more included in this 
 list . the clothing swap is a free clothing event where people can shop for free new and gently used clothes. 
 tuesday, april 20 
 virtual ecocommons tour 
 noon – 1 p.m. 
 jason gregory, senior planner, and jerry young, landscape project manager of the new greenspace, will give a tour of the ecocommons. register for the bluejeans tour 
 here 
 campus tree planting (in-person) 
 3 – 5 p.m., krone engineered biosystems building (ebb) 
 help transplant trees that have been growing in the campus nursery to spots around campus. sign up 
 here . 
 household hazardous waste collection 
 april 20 – 22, 9 a.m. – 2 p.m., environmental health and safety building, 793 marietta street nw 
 each member of the tech community may bring up to five containers of waste to be collected and disposed of at no charge. more information 
 here . 
 wednesday, april 21 
 wellness wednesday in the ecocommons (in-person) 
 11 a.m –2 p.m., ecocommons 
 a range of activities will be planned including yoga, bike repair, campus resources, and more. register 
 here 
 unveiling of the site marker for the former pickrick restaurant (in-person) 
 1:30 – 2:30 p.m., ecocommons (invite only) 
 lester maddox gained notoriety in the wake of the civil rights act of 1964 for shutting down his restaurant rather than serve black customers. georgia tech bought the property, and a marker stands on the site to educate the community about the events that took place there. 
 thursday, april 22 
 international earth day (in-person) 
 11 a.m. – 3 p.m., the kendeda building patio 
 a range of activities will be hosted including diy projects (painting, clothing decoration, green cleaning, and personal care products), with food to enjoy. from 12:30 to 2 p.m., the student organization, smile, will join students for a special planting. rsvp 
 here . 
 earth day bird walk with georgia audubon (in-person) 
 8 – 11 a.m., the kendeda building patio and ecocommons 
 there will be a bird walk hosted by experts to observe birds around the campus community and learn about building collisions and the importance of designing bird-safe glass. rsvp 
 here . 
 green meeting (virtual) 
 6 – 7 p.m. 
 students organizing for sustainability and the sga sustainability committee will host this semester’s green meeting, which brings together students to discuss the sustainability-related work they do. students will also discuss building a permanent green coalition. rsvp 
 here . 
 friday, april 23 
 movie night under the stars (in-person) 
 7 – 9:30 p.m., stamps field 
 enjoy a free screening of the disney movie 
 wall-e .   register 
 here . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 earth day 2021 events 
 contact 
 vanesa vargas 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000