eaton brings lighting expertise to georgia tech’s internet of things research center 
 power management joins georgia tech's internet of things research effort. 
 georgia tech's center for the development and application of internet-of-things technologies (cdait) is housed within the georgia tech research institute and located in the centergy building in tech square. 
 may 24, 2017 
 — atlanta, ga 
 power management company eaton today announced it joined the georgia institute of technology’s 
 center for the development and application of internet of things technologies 
 (cdait), an atlanta-based research center dedicated to developing and applying internet of things (iot) technologies. as a member company with a lighting division based in the atlanta area, eaton can now provide georgia tech students and faculty with lighting expertise and hands-on training to help support research that further enables transformational iot technologies. 
 in recent years, the iot has emerged as a new frontier that promises to reshape how people, data and devices interact. the increasing interconnectivity created by the combination of the internet, mobile devices, embedded sensors, data analytics and cloud computing has opened new avenues for technological innovation. 
 “iot systems are laying the groundwork for smart, connected buildings, communities and homes, and lighting is a key factor in the enablement and adoption of these technologies,” said parth joshi, chief technology officer and vice president, engineering, eaton’s lighting division. “working with the students and faculty at georgia tech’s cdait, we look forward to expanding our research into the many possibilities of iot-enabled devices while helping find new ways to apply them to serve the needs of businesses, governments and consumers.” 
 eaton’s cdait membership is part of a broader commitment to developing and implementing iot-connected applications that improve efficiency through controls and data. the new connected lighting classroom at eaton’s 
 source lighting education center 
 near atlanta features in-depth training and hands-on demonstrations to educate lighting specifiers, architects, engineers, electrical contractors, builders and university students about iot-connected lighting solutions. 
 “cdait is working to effectively and efficiently unite the many pieces of the iot puzzle, from sensing and actuating technology to information extraction,” said alain louchez, managing director of cdait. “by bringing eaton’s experts together with our students and faculty, we will increase our understanding of the role lighting plays in iot connectivity while expanding, educating and energizing the market around the unique capabilities of iot applications.” 
 a key element in this developing relationship is eaton’s engineering office in midtown atlanta, which will enable a direct connection to the georgia tech campus and the talented, aspiring engineers driving innovation in lighting. 
 “we are extremely pleased and honored to welcome a distinguished company such as eaton to the executive advisory board (‘the board”) of cdait to advise and guide cdait’s direction,” added jeff evans, chairman of the cdait board. 
 cdait (pronounced "sedate") is a global, non-profit, partner-funded center within the georgia institute of technology located in atlanta that fosters interdisciplinary research and education while driving general awareness about the internet of things. it aims at efficiently identifying, understanding and solving for its sponsors challenges and problems that may arise along the whole iot value chain. cdait connects sponsors with georgia tech faculty and researchers as well as industry members with similar interests. 
 to learn more about cdait, visit  cdait.gatech.edu . 
 eaton delivers a range of innovative and reliable indoor and outdoor lighting solutions, as well as controls products specifically designed to maximize performance, energy efficiency and cost savings. eaton lighting solutions serve customers in the commercial, industrial, retail, institutional, residential, utility and other markets. 
 eaton’s electrical business is a global leader with expertise in power distribution and circuit protection; backup power protection; control and automation; lighting and security; structural solutions and wiring devices; solutions for harsh and hazardous environments; and engineering services. eaton is positioned through its global solutions to answer today’s most critical electrical power management challenges. 
 eaton is a power management company with 2016 sales of $19.7 billion that provides energy-efficient solutions to help consumers manage electrical, hydraulic and mechanical power more efficiently, safely and sustainably. eaton is dedicated to improving the quality of life and the environment through the use of power management technologies and services. eaton has approximately 95,000 employees and sells products to customers in more than 175 countries. for more information, visit 
 eaton.com , and to learn more about eaton’s lighting solutions, visit 
 eaton.com / lighting . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 eaton's source lighting education center 
 center for the development and application of internet of things technologies 
 eaton 
 contact 
 lance.wallace@comm.gatech.edu 
 email 
 lance.wallace@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000