education assistance application period begins soon 
 beginning march 15, eligible employees are encouraged to apply for education assistance through the tuition assistance program and staff tuition reimbursement assistance program. 
 mar 01, 2024 
 beginning march 15, eligible employees are encouraged to apply for summer semester  education assistance 
 through the tuition assistance program (tap) and staff tuition reimbursement assistance program (strap). please ensure your tap or strap application is submitted and approved by april 15, no later than 5 p.m. applications received after this date cannot be accepted. 
 to learn more about the programs and application process for summer semester, click 
 here 
 for a recording from the education assistance: applying for tap and strap session. 
 tap 
 is offered by the university system of georgia (usg) board of regents and provides a tuition waiver to full-time, benefits-eligible employees, both faculty and staff, who have worked for at least six months within the usg. 
 time worked in a temporary position does not count toward the six-month eligibility requirement. 
 eligible employees may seek approval to enroll in up to nine academic semester hours for each of the three designated semesters: fall, spring, and summer. 
 employees must apply by the tap / strap application deadline to receive the waiver of tuition and mandatory fees. 
 strap 
 is offered by georgia tech and provides partial tuition reimbursement for full-time staff (exempt and non-exempt) who have worked for at least 12 months at georgia tech. 
 time worked in a temporary position does not count toward the 12-month eligibility requirement. 
 eligible employees may seek approval to enroll in up to six academic semester hours for each of the three designated semesters: fall, spring, and summer. 
 employees must apply by the tap / strap application deadline to be reimbursed for tuition. 
 programs of study must be applicable to a career field at georgia tech. 
 additional information can also be found in the 
 tap policy 
 and 
 strap policy. 
 related links 
 education assistance 
 contact 
 need help? 
 call the asc at 404.385.1111. 
 email the asc at 
 support@asc.gatech.edu . 
 submit a general hr request via the 
 administrative services portal . 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000