elavon invests in fintech innovation with georgia tech’s advanced technology development center 
 investment will create valuable partnerships to spur greater innovation in payments. 
 wally mlynarski is elavon's chief product officer. 
 dec 06, 2018 
 — atlanta, ga 
 elavon, a global payments provider and subsidiary of u.s. bancorp (nyse: usb), announced a new and significant, three-year financial commitment at the georgia institute of technology to further accelerate innovation across financial and payments technologies (fintech). 
 the advanced technology development center (atdc) at georgia tech is georgia’s technology incubator. it focuseson building and growing fintech companies in the state of georgia. elavon’s financial sponsorship will allow for further growth and startup support for entrepreneurs in the program. 
 as part of the sponsorship, elavon executives will mentor program participants on topics such as software and applications integration as well as consultation on effective go-to-market strategies. as the fintech space continues to evolve, partnerships with incumbents have become more important for an early-stage company’s customer acquisition and business model development. 
 “our investment in this program and local fintech companies brings us closer to the growing technology community in atlanta and across the entire payments ecosystem, and is part of elavon’s continued focus on integrated payments and ecommerce,” said wally mlynarski, elavon’s chief product officer. “with this partnership, we are able to directly impact and shape the future of payments as technology and business models continue to rapidly evolve.” 
 in addition to receiving the benefits of being an atdc program participant, startups in the incubator’s fintech program are integrated into georgia’s fintech ecosystem. this statewide ecosystem consists of strong public-private partnerships dedicated to the continued success of georgia fintech companies. atdc fintech provides access to industry, investors, and georgia tech’s resources to help these startups flourish as well as coordinating support from the technology association of georgia, fintech atlanta, and the metro atlanta chamber. 
 “we’re extremely excited to welcome elavon as our partner in further developing georgia’s early-stage fintech startup community,” said jeff gapusan, who is atdc’s fintech executive-in-residence and secured the sponsorship. “elavon is a world-class financial technology company. its resources, mentorship, and insight will enable startup founders to also succeed in this highly complex space.” 
 the atdc fintech program currently hosts 35 early-stage fintech startups. since the program’s inception in 2015, atdc fintech startups and recent graduates have raised more than $65 million in angel and institutional venture capital. 
 about elavon  ( www.elavon.com ) 
 elavon is wholly owned by u.s. bank, the fifth-largest bank in the united states, and provides end-to-end payment processing solutions and services to more than 1.3 million customers in the united states, europe, canada, mexico, and puerto rico. as the leading provider for airlines and a top five provider in hospitality, healthcare, retail, and public sector / education, elavon’s innovative payment solutions are designed to solve pain points for businesses from small to enterprise-sized. 
 about georgia tech 
 the georgia institute of technology is one of the world’s premier research universities. georgia tech is a national and international leader in scientific and technological research and education and is the nation’s leading producer of engineers as well as a leading producer of female and minority engineering ph.d. graduates. ranked among the top public universities by u.s. news & world report, the institute enrolls more than 25,000 undergraduate and graduate students in fields ranging from engineering, computing, and sciences, to business, design, and liberal arts. for additional information, visit  gatech.edu . 
 about the advanced technology development center (atdc) 
 the advanced technology development center (atdc), a program of the georgia institute of technology, is the state of georgia’s technology startup incubator. founded in 1980 by the georgia general assembly which funds it each year, atdc’s mission is to work with entrepreneurs in georgia to help them learn, launch, scale, and succeed in the creation of viable, disruptive technology companies. since its founding, atdc has grown to become one of the longest running and most successful university-affiliated incubators in the united states, with its graduate startup companies raising $3 billion in investment financing and generating more than $12 billion in revenue in the state of georgia. to learn more, visit  atdc.org . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 atdc 
 elavon 
 contact 
 for information about elavon, contact: 
 cara crifasi 
 303.261.2524 
 cara.crifasi@elavon.com 
 for information about atdc, contact: 
 péralte c. paul 
 404.316.1210 
 peralte@atdc.org 
 email 
 peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000