emerging leaders program 2022-2023 cohort selected 
 the seventh cohort of georgia tech's emerging leaders program represents all six colleges. 
 jun 24, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the seventh cohort of georgia tech’s emerging leaders program has been selected. starting in fall 2022 and continuing through spring 2023, participants will take part in several leadership development activities, including a fall weekend workshop, monthly workshops, small-group work, and a 360-degree assessment. 
 “we’re pleased to welcome the seventh cohort of the emerging leaders program,” said steven w. mclaughlin, provost and executive vice president for academic affairs. “supporting faculty as they pursue their leadership journey, the program is an investment in our faculty, our strategic plan goals, the institute, and the georgia tech community as a whole.” 
 all six of georgia tech’s colleges are represented in the seventh cohort. 
 scheller college of business 
 deven desai , associate professor and area coordinator for law and ethics 
 basak kalkanci , associate professor of operations management 
 college of computing 
 ada gavrilovska , associate professor – school of computer science 
 dana randall , advance professor of computing – school of computer science 
 college of design 
 alexander lerch , associate professor and director of graduate programs – school of music 
 pardis pishdad-bozorgi , associate professor and graduate program director – school of building construction 
 ivan allen college of liberal arts 
 narin hassan , associate professor and director of graduate studies for ms-global media and cultures – school of literature, media, and communication 
 college of sciences 
 tamara bogdanović , professor – school of physics 
 jennifer curtis , professor – school of physics 
 college of engineering 
 stanislav emelianov , joseph m. pettit chair in microelectronics, georgia research alliance eminent scholar, and professor – school of electrical and computer engineering and wallace h. coulter department of biomedical engineering 
 martha grover , professor and associate chair for graduate studies – school of chemical and biomolecular engineering 
 marta hatzell , associate professor and woodruff faculty fellow – george w. woodruff school of mechanical engineering 
 mark losego , associate professor and mse faculty fellow – school of materials science and engineering (mse) 
 lauren stewart , williams family early career professor and associate professor – school of civil and environmental engineering 
 susan thomas , associate professor and woodruff professor – george w. woodruff school of mechanical engineering 
 ying zhang , professor and senior associate chair – school of electrical and computer engineering 
 the emerging leaders program started in 2016 and is designed for associate and full professors who have attained tenure. the program is a collaboration between the office of the provost, the office of the executive vice president for research, the institute for leadership and social impact, and the office of the vice provost for faculty. 
 learn more about the emerging leaders program . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 office of the provost 
 email 
 provostsoffice@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000