energy dept invests $100m in gleb yushin’s ev battery startup 
 the company is ramping up production on anode technology yushin developed at georgia tech. 
 dec 13, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 in the decade since 
 professor gleb yushin’s 
 battery materials startup 
 participated in georgia tech’s advanced technology development center , investments in the company have rolled in — along with the first customers. 
 now the 
 u.s. department of energy (doe) is getting on board 
 with yushin’s georgia tech startup as part of federal efforts to reinvigorate tech manufacturing in the united states. 
 doe awarded sila nanotechnologies $100 million 
 this fall to support the company’s new factory in moses lake, washington, and help sila hire and train up to 300 workers for the facility. it was one of 21 projects funded in domestic battery materials processing and manufacturing. 
 “it’s our mission to help move america away from being energy dependent and become a leader in the energy transformation,” said yushin, the company’s chief technology officer and a faculty member in the georgia tech 
 school of materials science and engineering . “with this funding, sila will deliver proven, clean energy technology and world-scale manufacturing to revitalize the industry and gain independence.” 
 birthed from 
 yushin’s research on lithium-ion batteries , 
 sila 
 manufactures next-generation materials and a silicon anode technology that boosts battery energy density by 20%. the silicon anodes are a drop-in replacement for graphite anodes in lithium-ion batteries. the new facility is projected to produce enough capacity to power 200,000 electric vehicles by 2026. sila has inked a deal with mercedes-benz to use the company’s technology, starting with g-class vehicles. 
 read the full story on the college of engineering website. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 joshua stewart 
 college of engineering 
 email 
 jstewart@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000