enjoy labor day weekend in atlanta 
 it’s labor day weekend, and for those staying on or near campus, there are plenty of opportunities to enjoy the day off. 
 dragoncon parade 
 sep 01, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 it’s labor day weekend, and for those staying on or near campus, there are plenty of opportunities to enjoy the day off. 
 campus will still be lively, and events around the city will bring a festive spirit to the area. enjoy the weekend and the unofficial start of fall. 
 on-campus events 
 invasive species removal 
 friday, sept. 2 
 3 – 5 p.m., the kendeda building for innovative sustainable design 
 volleyball vs. dayton 
 friday, sept. 2 
 8 p.m., o’keefe gymnasium 
 catholic student organization kickball 
 saturday, sept. 3 
 10 a.m. – noon 
 burger bowl, couch park 
 volleyball vs. arizona state 
 saturday, sept. 3 
 5 p.m., o’keefe gymnasium 
 ballroom dance club: fall into dance 
 saturday, sept. 3 
 7 – 10:30 p.m. 
 cypress theater, john lewis student center 
 volleyball vs. florida international university 
 sunday, sept. 4 
 2 p.m., o’keefe gymnasium 
 board game club 
 sunday, sept. 4 
 2 – 5 p.m., room 105, instructional center 
 around atlanta 
 dragoncon 
 sept. 2-4 
 downtown atlanta 
 the annual multimedia and pop culture convention takes place in atlanta every labor day weekend and includes a parade, gaming, art displays, panel discussions, and more. 
 braves vs. marlins 
 sept. 2-4 
 truist park 
 the braves continue their pursuit of the playoffs with a home series against the marlins this weekend. 
 callaway gardens hot air balloons and fireworks 
 sept. 2-4 
 callaway gardens 
 a three-day celebration includes garden and beach access, waterfront activities, and entertainment including a birds of prey show. stay after sundown to watch the beach transform with the light of gigantic, glowing hot air balloons. 
 stone mountain fun 
 sept. 3-5 
 stone mountain park will have family-friendly attractions all weekend and top it off with the evening lasershow spectacular. 
 tinycon 
 sept. 3-4 
 atlanta children’s museum 
 this two-day celebration of fantasy, science fiction, and fictional universes will include potions class, jedi training, and fun for the whole family. 
 kickoff games football fest 
 sept. 4 
 10 a.m. – 5 p.m. 
 college football hall of fame / downtown atlanta 
 enjoy a free outdoor festival with inflatables, interactive booths, marching bands, mascots, and other college football fandom. 
 noshfest 
 sept. 4-5 
 temple kol emeth will host its free noshfest featuring jewish food and culture in the parking lot of the temple at 1415 old canton road in marietta. 
 football: georgia tech vs. clemson 
 monday, sept. 5 
 8 p.m., mercedes-benz stadium 
 the yellow jackets and tigers face off in the chick-fil-a kickoff game. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 kristen bailey 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000