enjoying a safe winter break in atlanta 
 the break looks a bit different this year as people across the country try to maintain social distancing and avoid large gatherings. that being said, there are still plenty of ways to enjoy the break while still following cdc guidelines. 
 snow on campus 
 dec 16, 2020 
 — atlanta, ga 
 now that finals are over, students have about a month to relax without classes. the break looks a bit different this year as people across the country try to maintain social distancing and avoid large gatherings. that being said, there are still plenty of ways to enjoy the break while still following 
 cdc guidelines . 
 virtual events 
 the final rose: a 
 bachelor / bachelorette 
 discussion 
 6 p.m. monday, dec. 28 
 bluejeans 
 housing and residence life will host a discussion about one of america’s biggest reality tv franchises. with this season of 
 the bachelorette 
 wrapping up on dec. 22 and the next season of 
 the bachelor 
 starting on jan. 4, there will be plenty to talk about. 
 virtual trivia: 2020 themed 
 5 p.m. tuesday, dec. 29 
 microsoft teams 
 like trivia? then join housing and residence life’s virtual trivia on tuesday, dec. 29. trivia questions will be centered around the people and events of this year, with other topics thrown in. let’s take some time to reflect on 2020 and get ready for a new year that we all hope will be better. georgia tech prizes will be given to the participants with the highest score. come along, meet new people, and be a part of the fun. you can rsvp for this event by filling out 
 this survey . 
 pianoforte december virtual concert: beethoven 250 festival 
 all day thursday, dec. 31 
 pianoforte’s youtube channel 
 calling all georgia tech pianists! submissions are currently open for pianoforte’s december concert, which will celebrate beethoven’s 250th birthday with performances of his music. all of the performances will be compiled and put online for a virtual concert. click 
 here 
 to learn more about how to submit a piece and watch the concert. 
 pastel tell-all 
 7 p.m. wednesday, jan. 6, 2021 
 bluejeans 
 paint and sip? that is so 2020. pastel tell all is the rave in 2021. join housing and residence life for an artistic hour working with a canvas and pastel. featured on 
 @the.art.room on tiktok , we will be doing pastel paintings in a few easy steps. by the end of it, you’ll think it was picked right off the sidewalk in 
 mary poppins . make sure to 
 rsvp 
 ahead of time to secure your spot and find out where to get your free supplies. 
 in-person ideas 
 starlight drive-in theatre 
 hours vary 
 2000 moreland ave. se, atlanta 
 the starlight theatre, atlanta’s very own drive-in, lets you watch new releases from the comfort of your own car. tickets are $10 per adult and $1 per child in your car. each ticket is good for two movies, which will play back to back on the same screen. click 
 here 
 to view showtimes. 
 skate the station 
 through jan. 18, 2021 
 1380 atlantic drive nw, atlanta 
 atlantic station, located near campus, hosts the largest outdoor skating rink in the southeast. this year, it’s back with covid-19 protocols in place, including frequent sanitization and reduced capacity on the ice. entry is $15 per adult and $12 per child, which includes skate rentals. click 
 here 
 to purchase tickets and read more about the rink’s safety rules. 
 holiday light displays 
 hours vary 
 across georgia 
 with the holidays come extravagant light displays, and georgia has no shortage, and you can walk or drive through them safely and conveniently. 
 atlantic station 
 has the one closest to campus, but other metro options include the atlanta botanical garden, six flags white water, and stone mountain. click 
 here 
 for information on other holiday light displays around the state. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 grace wyner 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000