enterprise 6 internship program applications open for summer 2024 
 are you a student currently enrolled in the university system of georgia (usg) who’s excited to take on new challenges in technology, business development, or ecosystem building? 
 enterprise 6 alums from the 2023 class (from left) olajide olugbade and hanyu lu. (photos: péralte paul) 
 feb 29, 2024 
 the longest running, most diverse university-based economic development organization in the u.s., the enterprise innovation institute (ei2) launched its founding program more than 60 years ago. since then, it has expanded to serve enterprises of all sizes, from pre-company teams and startups to long-running businesses, as well as communities seeking to revitalize their local economies. 
 through the enterprise 6 internship program, usg undergraduate and graduate students across a range of disciplines discover how the skills they’ve been cultivating in classrooms and labs can play a role in economic development. the program is made possible by funding from georgia tech's office of the executive vice president for research. 
 although the internship doesn’t accrue academic credit, students receive $25 an hour for a 20-hour work week. each intern is mentored by an ei2 research faculty member, and biweekly remote meetings enable participants to share observations about their experience. 
 “the enterprise innovation institute engages in meaningful work to expand economic opportunity for all, and the e6 program provides students the opportunity to work on real-world challenges supporting the equitable development and deployment of talent and innovation, both locally and globally,” said david bridges, the enterprise innovation institute's vice president. 
 “in some cases, e6 interns are so inspired by this experience that they change the trajectory of their ambitions.” 
 take, for example, eve pike, who at the time of her 2021 internship was a student in the sam nunn school of international affairs. working with enterprise 6 gave her a new set of reference points, and pike realized she wanted to pursue a career in tech — and possibly even expand into marketing or economics. “it broadened my horizon,” she said. 
 hanyu lu found that her experience as an enterprise 6 intern in 2023 “significantly enhanced my skills in analysis and development.” after e6, lu, who is working toward a master’s degree in computational science and engineering at georgia tech, went on to complete an internship at heartland forward, in bentonville, arkansas, where she strengthened the abilities she honed as an e6 intern. 
 for another member of the 2023 cohort, olajide olugbade, who is pursuing a ph.d. in science and technology policy at georgia tech, the enterprise 6 internship helped him secure his current position as a graduate research assistant. “the knowledge i gained, the skills i demonstrated, and the relationship i built while conducting research for the ei2 global team contributed to being the candidate of choice,” he said. 
 the benefits of the enterprise 6 program flow in both directions; not only do the interns gain valuable skills from their experiences, but they also contribute to the enterprise innovation institute’s mission. 
 “e6 students bring fresh and unique perspectives to our work,” said bridges. “these perspectives allow our programs to deliver leading-edge, capacity-building support to people, companies, and communities in georgia and beyond.” 
 enterprise 6 internships run from may 13 to aug. 9. seven internships are available, and interested students may apply to a maximum of two. 
 there are seven projects for this summer and interested students may apply to  no more than two projects . see the project outlines from the application link:  https: / / innovate.gatech.edu / enterprise-6-internship-project-listing-summer-2024 / 
 earn : $25 per hour (up to 20 hours per week). 
 opportunity to : serve enterprises and communities of all sizes. 
 requirements : must thrive on challenging projects in technology, business development, or ecosystem building. 
 eligibility : open to all university system of georgia students. 
 when : may 13 to august 9. 
 location : hybrid (work remotely and in technology square, atlanta). 
 deadline : résumés due march 22. 
 apply:  https: / / innovate.gatech.edu / enterpise-6-application-2024 / . 
 questions? email :  krystle.richardson@innovate.gatech.edu . 
 contact 
 eve tolpa 
 eve.tolpa@innovate.gatech.edu 
 email 
 eve.tolpa@innovate.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000