environmental health engineering graduate student wins cridc innovation competition 
 winning technology is disinfection system that addresses access challenges to clean drinking water 
 mo jarin, a doctoral student in georgia tech’s school of civil and environmental engineering, is the 2022 winner of the career, research, and innovation development conference’s innovation competition for her voltapure water disinfection technology. 
 feb 16, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 mo jarin , a doctoral student in georgia tech’s  school of civil and environmental engineering  has won the  career, research, and innovation development conference ’s innovation competition for her voltapure water disinfection technology. 
 jarin, who is pursuing her degree in environmental health engineering, earned a $1,000 cash prize for her efforts. 
 the annual event is sponsored by  venturelab , which helps georgia tech researchers explore market opportunities and create startups based on their work. 
 in her three-minute pitch, jarin explained more than 800 million people worldwide lack consistent access to clean drinking water due to the high cost of treatment plants, difficulties in transporting chemicals, and the aftermath of carcinogenic disinfection byproducts. 
 “with the current trend in water disinfection centered on alternative solutions to standard chemicals like chlorine, we are excited to continue exploring the market opportunities for voltapure,” jarin said. “i am honored and extremely grateful to have had the opportunity to present to a panel of experienced judges — and especially female entrepreneurs — on our current progress with the commercialization efforts for voltapure. 
 voltapure’s novel co-axial electrode copper ionization cell enables superior water disinfection, while producing a low-level, safe effluent copper concentration. 
 “mo made a compelling case for the commercial potential of her voltapure water disinfection technology,” said venturelab director  keith mcgreggor . “her idea illustrates why the innovation competition is a great opportunity for georgia tech student researchers to think about what it might take to start a business based on their work.” 
 to better understand her technology’s potential, jarin has already participated in georgia tech’s inaugural female founders program and audited the  create-x  startup launch program. she was also awarded a $50,000 grant through the  national science foundation’s innovation-corps  program to participate in a seven-week bootcamp focused on experiential education to gain insight into her startup’s industry. she is advised by  xing xie , the carlton s. wilder assistant professor in the school of civil and environmental engineering. 
 strong contenders 
 two other student presenters were selected as runners-up and will each receive $500.  nathan zavanelli , pursuing a doctoral degree in mechanical engineering / bioengineering, and advised by  woon-hong yeo  in the  george w. woodruff school of mechanical engineering , explained the benefits of his “smart patch” for sleep apnea assessments. the disorder affects more than 900 million adults worldwide, but most often goes undiagnosed. 
 amirtha varshini anbuchezhiyan sindhanai , a computer science master’s student in tech’s  college of computing , and advised by  james rehg , described how her technology uses machine learning and machine vision to help job applicants review and enhance their nonverbal communications skills. 
 lavonda brown , a georgia tech alumna and founder of startup  eyegage ,  served as a judge alongside  nammy vedire , director of platform and operations of  engage ,  the georgia tech-affiliated incubator for enterprise-focused startups. 
 venturelab will provide ongoing support, reaching out to all the competitors to offer guidance and help them pursue programs and grants that support the transition from success in the lab to success in the market. 
 georgia tech students, faculty, and staff interested in these opportunities to further the commercialization of their own research may contact venturelab through its website,  venturelab.gatech.edu , or by e-mailing  info@venturelab.gatech.edu . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 péralte c. paul 
 404.316.1210 
 peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu 
 email 
 peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000