ethics week returns with community engagement events 
 one of georgia tech’s core values, “we act ethically,” guides our priorities every day. 
 ethics week 2021 
 oct 26, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 one of georgia tech’s core values, “we act ethically,” guides our priorities every day. but 
 ethics awareness week 
 puts a spotlight on that value and the ways we engage ethically around campus. 
 this year’s events, taking place nov. 8–12, will be a mix of scheduled in-person, virtual, and hybrid events, daily ethics iq questions, and in-person ethics tables around campus. experts  from the 
 veterans resource center , the 
 lgbtqia resource center , 
 ethicx , and the 
 alumni association , among others, will join the 
 office of ethics and compliance 
 to showcase ethics in a variety of contexts. 
 kara tucker, lead counsel and director of ethics and compliance in the office of the general counsel, said partnering with campus departments helped create a diverse schedule of events that provides an opportunity for everyone to engage. 
 “as an organization whose mission is to develop leaders in  our students, faculty, and staff, we know that leading ethically is a critical component. a leader is anyone who influences others, and we aim to create leaders who not only act ethically, but also influence others to act ethically.” 
 view a full list of the week’s events and chances to win door prizes at 
 ethicsfirst.gatech.edu / ethicsweek . 
 a few events to look forward to: 
 game time mashup with executive leadership : president ángel cabrera and executive vice presidents steven mclaughlin, chaouki abdallah, and kelly fox will go head-to-head playing familiar games with an ethical twist. nov. 8, 10:30 a.m. 
 register to attend. 
 sticker blitz with the ramblin ’ 
 wreck: 
 visit the ramblin’ wreck, take photos, collect vinyl stickers, and receive ethics first giveaways. nov. 8, 11 a.m., exhibition hall. no registration required. 
 a 
 “ google chat ” 
 with google's chief compliance officer, spyro karetsos : keynote speaker spyro karetsos, chief compliance officer at google, will offer insight about expectations and best practices at google. nov. 9, 10 a.m. 
 register to attend. 
 preparing future leaders for ethical challenges : an interdisciplinary panel of faculty in biological sciences, civil and environmental engineering, business, and public policy discusses teaching ethics and preparing students for ethical dilemmas in their careers. nov. 10, 11 a.m. 
 register to attend . 
 gender equity from the perspective of military leadership : examine gender equality and equity in the military through the experiences of two u.s. military members and current georgia tech students. they will discuss gender bias and equity, stereotypes, sexism, and how these challenges affect veterans transitioning to civilian life. nov. 12, 12:30 p.m. 
 register to attend . 
 all in-person and hybrid events  will have giveaways and beverages or light refreshments. 
 this year, ethics awareness week coincides with the annual online 
 compliance training 
 that is required of all employees. the four training modules must be completed by nov. 19 in the 
 georgia tech learner dashboard . 
 learn more about ethics at georgia tech at 
 ethicsfirst.gatech.edu . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 kara tucker 
 ethics and compliance 
 kristen bailey 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000