events around atlanta over thanksgiving break 
 the georgia tech campus will close for thanksgiving break nov. 23 – 24. if you’re staying in town, celebrate the holiday season with these events around atlanta. 
 photo credit: danny karnik / georgia tech athletics 
 nov 20, 2023 
 thanksgiving is synonymous with food, family, and football. if you plan to stay in town over the break, there are events around atlanta to celebrate not only the end of fall, but also the beginning of the holiday season. 
 thanksgiving day 5k 
 when: thursday, nov. 23, 7:45 a.m. 
 where: center parc stadium, 755 hank aaron drive, atlanta, ga 30315 
 start your thanksgiving day off by burning some calories or cheering on the participants of the 5k, which begins under the olympic rings at center parc stadium. a half-marathon race will also take runners through the city’s historic neighborhoods before finishing back at the stadium for a post-race celebration. 
 more information . 
 georgia festival of trees 
 when: friday, nov. 24 – sunday, nov. 26, hours vary. 
 where: georgia world congress center, building a 
 if you haven’t already picked out your christmas tree or you’re just looking to get in the holiday spirit, check out the georgia festival of trees. the event auctions off specialty trees with proceeds benefiting street grace — a nonprofit dedicated to combating human trafficking and the exploitation of minors. along with the trees, the festival offers live entertainment, activities, gift shops from local artisans, food, and more. 
 more information . 
 helluva block party 
 when: saturday, nov. 25, 3:30 p.m. 
 where: north avenue 
 with atlanta’s own ludacris headlining, helluva block party’s inaugural season ends with an exclamation point. four hours prior to the yellow jackets and the georgia bulldogs renewing their rivalry inside bobby dodd stadium at hyundai field, north avenue will once again be transformed into the ultimate tailgate spot with live entertainment, games, food trucks, and concessions. 
 more information . 
 tree lighting at the battery 
 when: saturday, nov. 25, 7 p.m. 
 where: the plaza at battery atlanta, 755 battery ave. se, atlanta, ga 30339 
 ring in the holiday season at the battery for the seventh annual tree lighting ceremony with santa and the atlanta braves mascot, blooper, assisting with the festivities. after the tree is lit, guests are invited to stay for an outdoor screening of abominable. 
 more information . 
 clean, old fashioned hate 
 when: saturday, nov. 25, 7:30 p.m. 
 where: bobby dodd stadium at hyundai field 
 the yellow jackets welcome the georgia bulldogs to the flats for the 117th edition of clean, old fashioned hate saturday, with kickoff set for 7:30 p.m. tech is seeking its first win in the series since 2016 and its first win in atlanta since 1999, when current head coach brent key was a member of the yellow jacket offensive line. in his first season at the helm, he has led the program to bowl eligibility after securing a 31-22 win over syracuse last saturday. 
 more information . 
 illumninights at zoo atlanta 
 when: through jan. 14, 5:30 – 8:30 p.m. 
 where: zoo atlanta 
 zoo atlanta transforms into a “nighttime wonderland” for its annual illuminights at the zoo event. this year’s display features new chinese lanterns and additional experiences along with a “mile-long stroll of stunning contemplation of the wildlife of our planet and creatures of our imagination, from luminous leopards to a towering fiery phoenix.” you’ll also be able to see some of the zoo’s nocturnal residents and other animals snoozing in their habitats. 
 more information . 
 ice skating 
 there are several locations around atlanta to lace up your skates this holiday season. 
 - 
 atlantic station 
 - 
 piedmont park 
 - 
 ponce city market 
 - 
 avalon 
 pop-up bars and restaurants 
 explore atlanta’s culinary scene while enjoying unique experiences, seasonal dishes, and cocktails at various pop-up restaurants and bars around the city. 
 *must be 21+ at certain locations 
 -           grinch pop-up at hamp & harry’s 
 -           tinsel tavern @ live! at the battery atlanta 
 -           atl yule @ westside motor lounge 
 -           feliz navidad @ pachengo’s 
 -           miracle bar atlanta 
 -           blitzen room @ biltong bar 
 for more from eater atlanta, 
 click here . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 steven gagliano 
 - institute communications 
 email 
 steven.gagliano@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000