faces of manufacturing 2017 to profile industry heroes 
 nominations sought to recognize those working in and supporting georgia's manufacturing industry. 
 sarah daly, a 2016 faces of manufacturing awardee, is plant manager of fibervisions in covington, georgia. daly, who obtained her degree in engineering, says she's always enjoyed taking things apart to see how she could make them better. (photo credit: katie takacs) 
 oct 18, 2016 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the georgia manufacturing extension partnership at georgia tech (gamep) is seeking nominations to recognize those georgians who illustrate the critical role they and the industry play in the state economy. 
 the faces of manufacturing campaign, now in its third year, showcases the importance of a sector that employs more than 365,000 at 10,000 manufacturing companies of all sizes across georgia. collectively, the industry has a total manufacturing output of $53 billion per year. 
 the 2017 faces campaign, which is run by the gamep and is supported in part by the georgia department of economic development, will feature one person in the industry from each of the department’s 12 regions. 
 nominations for 2017 faces are open through friday, nov. 18, at: 
 http: / / facesofmanufacturing.com / call-for-nominations / . 
 to be eligible, nominees must be employed in manufacturing or have ties to the industry. those chosen as the face of manufacturing will be selected by a committee comprised of georgia tech representatives, economic development groups, manufacturing companies, and related associations. 
 “over the last two years, we have shared compelling and interesting life stories of our nominees,” said gamep director karen j. fite. “our faces represent georgia’s rich tapestry of a workforce that’s talented, dedicated, and committed to the success of their individual companies and the economic vibrancy of manufacturing and the state as a whole.” 
 about the faces of manufacturing: 
 each month, gamep will highlight a different person as the face of manufacturing in georgia. for more information, visit: 
 http: / / facesofmanufacturing.com . 
 about the georgia manufacturing extension partnership (gamep): 
 the georgia manufacturing extension partnership (gamep) is an economic development program of the enterprise innovation institute at the georgia institute of technology. the gamep is a member of the national mep network supported by the national institute of standards and technology. with offices in nine regions across the state, the gamep has been serving georgia manufacturers since 1960. it offers a solution-based approach to manufacturers through coaching and education designed to increase top line growth and reduce bottom line cost. for more information, visit: 
 http: / / gamep.org . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 georgia manufacturing extension partnership 
 faces of manufacturing 
 contact 
 for inquiries about the gamep, contact: 
 katie takacs 
 404.385.0542 
 katie.takacs@innovate.gatech.edu 
 email 
 peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu 
 additional information 
 know a great candidate for the faces of manufacturing? please fill out our nomination form (gamep.org / faces-of-manufacturing) by nov. 18, 2016 .  questions? contact katie takacs at katie.takacs@innovate.gatech.edu. 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000