faculty executive leadership academy fellows selected 
 four faculty members have been selected for the first cohort of fela. 
 left to right: susan burns, professor and associate chair for administration and finance, school of civil and environmental engineering; hang lu, love family professor of chemical and biomolecular engineering, school of chemical and biomolecular engineering; pinar keskinocak, william w. george chair and professor, h. milton stewart school of industrial and systems engineering; and alessandro (alex) orso, professor and associate dean, college of computing 
 nov 18, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 four faculty members have been selected to participate in the first cohort of the two-year faculty executive leadership academy (fela). those selected include susan burns, professor and associate chair for administration and finance, school of civil and environmental engineering; hang lu, love family professor of chemical and biomolecular engineering, school of chemical and biomolecular engineering; pinar keskinocak, william w. george chair and professor, h. milton stewart school of industrial and systems engineering; and alessandro (alex) orso, professor and associate dean, college of computing. 
 fela is designed to identify and develop senior faculty members for leadership. this program will build on individuals’ previous leadership development experiences by providing first access to senior leadership and their decisions, offering close and accessible mentoring, and participating in the formulation of solutions and policies related to real problems and ongoing issues. 
 the first group of four fela fellows will have rotations over a two-year period, from january 2022 through december 2023. 
 fela includes four components designed to foster a holistic leadership development experience for the fellows: shadowing georgia tech’s executive leaders; working on short-term, high-impact projects; meetings and activities under the direction of former provost rafael l. bras; and access to leadership development resources. 
 more information is available on the 
 faculty affairs 
 site. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 jaydale codrington-poyotte 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000