faculty honored as national academy of inventors fellows 
 three faculty from georgia tech have been chosen as 2022 national academy of inventors (nai) fellows, the highest professional distinction for academic inventors. 
 from left: adegboyega "yomi" oyelere, madhavan swaminathan, zhong lin wang. 
 dec 08, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 three faculty from georgia tech have been chosen as 2022 
 national academy of inventors (nai) fellows , the highest professional distinction for academic inventors. 
 the new class of fellows includes 
 adegboyega "yomi" oyelere 
 of the college of sciences, along with 
 madhavan swaminathan 
 and 
 zhong lin wang 
 of the college of engineering. 
 they are among approximately 
 150 honorees 
 from research universities and governmental and non-profit institutions around the world. they were chosen by the nai for demonstrating “a highly prolific spirit of innovation in creating or facilitating outstanding inventions that have made a tangible impact on the quality of life, economic development, and welfare of society.” 
 oyelere 
 is a professor in the 
 school of chemistry & biochemistry . his research spans bioorganic chemistry, biochemistry, and drug design with interrelated work across rna-small molecule interaction, targeted histone deacetylase (hdac) inhibition, and design and synthesis of novel bioconjugates for molecular delivery applications. 
 oyelere's lab has worked to 
 develop a therapeutic strategy for cancer treatment 
 to inhibit enzymes called histone deacetylases, which play an important role in the regulation of gene expression. he has also worked on the design of histone deacetylase inhibitors that can be taken up by the hormones expressed on the surface of hormone-positive breast cancer cells to stop the cells from dividing. in 2018, he received georgia tech’s 
 outstanding undergraduate mentor senior faculty award . 
 swaminathan 
 is the john pippin chair in microsystems packaging & electromagnetics in the 
 school of electrical and computer engineering 
 and has a joint appointment in the 
 school of materials science and engineering (mse) . he directs the 
 3d systems packaging research center 
 at georgia tech. he is an internationally recognized researcher in electronics packaging, an area that is expected to fuel the semiconductor industry over the next decade. 
 swaminathan holds 31 patents and is the founder and co-founder of two start-up companies (e-system design and jacket micro devices). 
 wang 
 is the regents’ professor and hightower chair emeritus in mse. his discovery and breakthroughs in developing nanogenerators established the principle and technological roadmap for harvesting mechanical energy from environment and biological systems for powering mobile sensors. 
 wang’s work also p­ioneered the field of self-powered sensors, and he coined piezotronics and piezo-phototronics 
 for the third-generation semiconductors . 
 wang holds 70 u.s. and foreign patents. 
 georgia tech now has 16 nai fellows. the new cohort will be inducted at the nai fellows induction ceremony in july. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 coe newsroom: swaminathan, wang honored as national academy of inventors fellows 
 contact 
 jason maderer 
 jess hunt-ralston 
 email 
 jess@cos.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000