film logistics committee works to bring more film and photography to campus 
 georgia tech introduces new film logistics committee to campus! 
 jun 21, 2023 
 and…action! georgia tech has left its mark in many movies, documentaries, tv series, and still photography. with the help of the newly developed film logistics committee, there is a greater focus on capturing the beauty and history of the campus in film. the division of 
 student engagement and well-being ’s auxiliary services is proud of its partnership with several representatives to support film projects on campus. 
 the film logistics committee includes members from institute communications, facilities, fire safety, georgia tech police department, risk management, parking & transportation services, legal, georgia tech athletic association, and the student & campus events centers. when filming and photography occur, the committee works to ensure that the structural integrity of the campus is protected, the institute’s brand is well-represented, and appropriate logistical support and security is provided. the committee is also responsible for pre-planning each project, including reviewing license agreements, reserving campus spaces, aligning with the campus calendar, and ensuring all fire safety measures are in place. 
 the committee is led by julie birchfield, georgia tech’s recently appointed assistant director for film logistics and business development in auxiliary services. julie is no stranger to the task, having worked in commercial film management, developing a diverse portfolio of commercials, tv shows, and major motion pictures. 
 “it’s an exciting time to work with film and live in atlanta,” said julie. “there are so many productions in and around the atlanta area, and since we have such a beautiful campus, with gorgeous architecture and landscaping, it’s not surprising that the interest from the film community has already been overwhelming.” 
 “it takes a village to pull off these big projects and the film logistics committee has been great to work with. the team makes it look easy when it’s not entirely easy…but isn’t that part of the movie magic?” 
 julie birchfield manages all aspects of film production on georgia tech’s campus from logistical planning to campus communication. since september 2022, she has managed 12 commercial film / photography projects and six internal projects. so, the next time you walk around and see a camera crew on campus, you will know that julie and her team are behind the effort! 
 under julie’s leadership, the film logistics committee is committed to opening doors for georgia tech to thrive in film and for georgia tech to continue its mission to 
 amplify impact 
 beyond our campus. for more information about filming at georgia tech and the process for requesting projects, visit 
 www.campusservices.gatech.edu / campus-filming 
 or contact julie birchfield at 
 julie.birchfield@gatech.edu . 
 additional images 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000