film production coming to campus 
 starting this weekend, there will be filming near bobby dodd stadium, and the campus community should be aware of a few potential disruptions. 
 oct 21, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 for many years, georgia tech has been a much sought-after location for film productions, and since campus has resumed more of its pre-pandemic activities, filming is back. starting this weekend, there will be filming near bobby dodd stadium, and the campus community should be aware of a few potential disruptions. 
 beginning at 7 a.m. on sunday, oct. 23, 
 tech tower lawn 
 will be closed and will reopen at 8 p.m. on tuesday, oct. 25. during this time, pedestrians will need to choose an alternative route around this space. 
 in addition, the 
 callaway plaza 
 on the north side of bobby dodd stadium will be closed from 6 to 10 a.m. on monday, oct. 24. athletes may still enter and exit the edge building; however, they should expect brief delays. 
 the following roads will have partial closures on monday, oct. 24. 
 a portion of 
 bobby dodd way , from fowler street nw to techwood drive nw, will be closed to vehicle traffic from 6 to 10 a.m. 
 a portion of 
 brittain drive , from the alleyway at alpha chi omega house to bobby dodd way, will be closed to vehicle traffic from 5 to 10 a.m. 
 pedestrian and bicycle traffic in these areas may also be delayed. please consider an alternative route, or plan for additional time if you need to pass through these areas. 
 parking in the nearby areas will also be affected as follows: 
 lot e-46 surface lot 
 and the 
 centennial olympic park gravel lot 
 will be closed sunday, oct. 23 through tuesday, oct. 25, and will reopen wednesday, oct. 26. 
 parking spaces on the south end of 
 brittain drive 
 will be unavailable on monday, oct. 24. 
 peters parking deck 
 will have limited availability on monday, oct. 24. 
 parking and transportation is reaching out to permit holders in these locations with additional information on alternative parking. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 julie birchfield 
 assistant director, film logistics and business development 
 auxiliary services operations 
 division of student engagement and well-being 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000