finalists chosen for vice provost for international initiatives 
 four finalists chosen in the search for the next vice provost for international initiatives will present at an open seminar. 
 tech tower 
 may 14, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 four finalists have been chosen in the search for the next vice provost for international initiatives. the search follows the announcement by yves berthelot, the current vice provost for international initiatives, that he will be retiring june 30 after 36 years of service to georgia tech. 
 as part of the final selection process, each candidate will present at an hour-long open seminar on the theme “connecting globally: achieving georgia tech’s international vision.” candidate seminars are open to all students, faculty, and staff. those wishing to attend any of the seminars can do so 
 virtually here , safely attend in person, or watch a post-event video. 
 the finalists are listed below in order of their campus seminar presentations, which will all be held from 
 11 a.m. to noon in clough 152 : 
 bernard j. kippelen , joseph m. pettit professor in the school of electrical and computer engineering, will present an open seminar on 
 monday, may 17 . 
 michael l. best , professor in the sam nunn school of international affairs and the school of interactive computing, will present an open seminar on 
 tuesday, may 18 . 
 anna westerstahl stenport , professor and chair in the school of modern languages, will present an open seminar on 
 wednesday, may 19 . 
 ghassan alregib , john and marilu mccarty chair in the school of electrical and computer engineering, will present an open seminar on 
 thursday, may 20 . 
 additional details, including each candidate’s curriculum vitae and links to the seminar videos and surveys, can be found on the vice provost for international initiatives 
 search website . survey forms will be accessible through midnight on monday, may 24. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 michael toney , director of academic administration 
 office of the provost 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000