first generation college graduate 
 frida carrera is a double major receiving the first college degree in her family. 
 frida carrera's internship experience is in marketing, and she plans to work in that field. (photo by rob felt) 
 may 04, 2023 
 this weekend, frida carrera will become the first person in her family to graduate from college. the forest park, georgia, resident is receiving a degree from georgia tech with a double major in 
 business 
 and in 
 literature, media, and communication . 
 “my parents and family have made some immense sacrifices for me to be where i am today, and it will pay off once i walk on the stage and receive my degree,” said carrera. “coming from a low-income background and an underrepresented minority group, i hope to inspire my younger family members that they can achieve anything they put their minds to, especially in higher education.” 
 although they did not attend college, carrera’s parents were determined to set her on the path toward higher education by enrolling her in a college preparatory school. she attended elite scholars academy, a charter school in clayton county, georgia, and later was dually enrolled at clayton state university. while in high school she toured georgia tech and was interested in writing and communications as well as business. 
 “initially i chose literature, media, and communication as my major and later added the business major because i became interested in marketing,” she said. her internship experience has been in marketing, and she plans to work in that field. 
 her advice to current students is to make the most of their time at tech. “everybody’s situations and aspirations are different, so it’s up to you to make the best of what you have in order to realize your goals.” 
 joining carrera for commencement will be her parents, two siblings, and other close family members. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 victor rogers 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000