a framework for equity in energy and environmental engineering 
 joe bozeman has created a framework to help his peers utilize more equitable data in their energy and environmental engineering studies. 
 joe bozeman 
 may 16, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 as diversity, equity, and inclusion continue to be among the nation’s most important focus areas, a georgia tech researcher has created a framework to help his peers utilize more equitable data in their energy and environmental engineering studies. 
 one of 
 joe bozeman ’s core research areas is america’s food consumption habits and how they affect climate change, specifically greenhouse gas emissions. the assistant professor in georgia tech’s 
 school of civil and environmental engineering 
 looks at food intake across a number of groups, including socioeconomic status, race, and age. using that data, he’s able to create models that better inform communities and assist policy makers. 
 however, the most consistent, thorough data he uses to develop those models are from 2005-2010. five-year datasets before and after that timeframe aren’t standardized, as all sociodemographic groups are not included. this makes it difficult for bozeman to draw comparisons that are inclusive of everyone across spatial scales and time periods. 
 it’s one reason why he and researchers at carnegie mellon university and the university of colorado denver have 
 published a framework and 10-step process 
 to help engineers, scientists, and community members standardize their data related to energy and environmental topics. their goal is to integrate equity into these fields, a practice bozeman and his colleagues call systemic equity. by doing so, they hope to create a system that all demographics of groups are included, including age groups, income levels, race, and ethnicity. read the entire story on the college of engineering website. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 jason maderer 
 college of engineering 
 maderer@gatech.edu 
 email 
 maderer@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000