gamep continues faces of manufacturing campaign 
 each month will feature a different georgia resident involved in manufacturing. 
 the georgia manufacturing extension partnership at georgia tech (gamep) has launched faces of manufacturing to showcase the unsung heroes of georgia manufacturing and highlight the important role they and the industry play in the state. learn more about the campaign here: http: / / gamep.org / faces-of-manufacturing / 
 sep 28, 2015 
 — atlanta, ga 
 across georgia, nearly 360,000 people — through hard work, dedication, and a passion for what they do — form the backbone of a very important segment of the state’s economy: manufacturing. these unsung everyday heroes account for about 9 percent of georgia’s total workforce, and as a sector, manufacturing contributes $52 billion to the state’s economy each year.  that represents 11.5 percent of georgia’s total gross domestic product. but beyond the facts and figures and the collection of plants, mills, and factories that are found across the state, the true story of manufacturing lies within the people who make the industry a critical component of the state. as part of a continuing initiative to honor and highlight those who found their careers in the sector, the georgia manufacturing extension partnership at georgia tech (gamep) is accepting nominations for the 2016 
 faces of manufacturing . this continuing campaign is designed to showcase georgia manufacturing and highlight the important role those who work in the industry play in the state. the faces campaign also highlights the diversity of careers that can be found in the industry from robotics to process engineering to product design that are challenging and rewarding. gamep will highlight a different nominee each month in 2016 as that month’s face of manufacturing.  to be eligible, nominees must be employed in manufacturing or have ties to the industry. the nominations will be accepted through friday, october 30, 2015. nominations will be taken through an 
 online form . those chosen as the face of manufacturing will be selected by a 12-member committee comprised of representatives from georgia tech, economic development groups, manufacturing companies, and related associations. “this past year, as we have travelled across the state and met with all of the faces of manufacturing, we learned so much from these men and women about how important manufacturing has been in their lives,” said gamep director karen j. fite. “from lafayette to macon to albany to atlanta, so many of our faces shared their inspirational stories of how manufacturing has not only changed their lives — some profoundly — but it also helped to keep their communities strong, and georgia thriving.” 
 additional images 
 related links 
 faces of manufacturing 
 contact 
 laura diamond  georgia tech media relations 404-894-6016   questions about the faces of manufacturing program? contact katie takacs at: 
 katie.takacs@innovate.gatech.edu . 
 email 
 laura.diamond@gatech.edu 
 additional information 
 faces of manufacturing know someone who is a great candidate for the faces of manufacturing? please fill out the 
 online nomination form 
 no later than friday, october 30.  questions about the faces of manufacturing program? contact katie takacs at: katie.takacs@innovate.gatech.edu. 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000