georgia tech nmr center to showcase new spectrometers during homecoming week 
 open house will highlight 700- and 800-mhz instruments and helium recovery plant. 
 leslie gelbaum and johannes leisen during unpacking of new nmr instruments in july 2016. photo by julia kubanek. 
 oct 03, 2016 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the 
 georgia tech nmr center , a campus-wide multiuser facility, will hold an open house on friday of homecoming week, oct. 28, 2016. everyone is invited, especially visiting alumni, to view the latest additions to the center’s suite of nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr) spectrometers. 
 nmr spectrometry is a powerful analytical tool, providing information such as molecular structure and dynamics. advances in instrumentation have enabled nmr spectrometry to move into solid-state and solution applications. lately, nmr has been used increasingly in high-throughput screening for drug discovery and related uses. 
 analysis by nmr is based on the interaction of certain atomic nuclei with an external magnetic field. the higher the frequency of this external magnetic field, the greater the sensitivity of the instrument, and the richer the information one can get from nmr analysis 
 in july 2016, the georgia tech nmr center installed two 
 bruker avance instruments , one with a 700-mhz, and the other with an 800-mhz, magnet. these are among the highest-field-strength-magnets currently available in the market. 
 “the recent investment of more than $5 million in new solid-state and solution capabilities enables advanced studies encompassing the imaging of small objects, the atomic level structure and dynamics of ceramics, small molecules of relevance to biology and materials science, synthetic polymers and biological macromolecules,” says 
 angus p. wilkinson , a chemistry professor and associate chair for operations and undergraduate programs in the 
 school of chemistry and biochemistry. 
 “georgia tech’s investment in this scientific equipment not only will make our experiments more successful and our research more grandiose,” says 
 julia kubanek , a professor of biological sciences and the associate dean for research in the college of sciences. “they have already been effectively used to recruit new faculty to georgia tech,” she adds. 
 nmr instruments use superconducting magnet technology, cooling the magnet to the extremely low temperature of 4 k, with the help of liquid helium. “in addition to our working instruments, a sectioned magnet will be available for inspection so that visitors can gain an appreciation of the internal construction of these very expensive magnets,” wilkinson says. also on display will be the newly installed helium recovery plant, which takes helium as it boils off from the magnets and condenses it to liquid helium at 4 k. given the shortage of helium worldwide, “this system helps conserve a nonrenewable and very expensive resource,” wilkinson says. 
 leslie gelbaum , the center’s manager and a principal research scientist in the school of chemistry and biochemistry, will be on hand to answer questions and consult on scientific problems relating to biological and non-biological molecules in solution. 
 johannes leisen , the center’s assistant director and also a principal research scientist in the school of chemistry and biochemistry, will be available to answer questions and consult on problems that relate to studies of solid samples and imaging. 
 the open house will take place at 2:00-4:00 pm on friday, oct. 28, 2016. the center is located in the basement of the 
 molecular science and engineering building 
 (901 atlantic drive), room g143. 
 visitors are asked to gather in room g021 for an introductory slide show and snacks, before going to room g143 in small groups for the lab tour. 
 for more information, contact wendy harris, 404.894.1180. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 wendy harris 
 school of chemistry and biochemistry 
 email 
 wendy.harris@chemistry.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000