georgia tech hosts nanowire week 2023 
 the event, which kicked off on national nanotechnology day, brought together attendees and speakers for four and a half days of talks, poster sessions, and panel discussions. 
 nov 03, 2023 
 this year, nanowire week 2023 took place at georgia tech’s global learning center from october 9-13, 2023. the event, which kicked off on national nanotechnology day, brought together attendees and speakers for four and a half days of talks, poster sessions, and panel discussions covering all aspects of nanowire research and development – from fabrication and fundamental properties to applications. 
 “hosting nanowire week 2023 at georgia tech’s global learning center has been an extraordinary experience,” said michael filler, interim executive director for the institute of electronics and nanotechnology. “this conference has highlighted the interdisciplinary nature of nanowire research, bringing together scientists and engineers from around the globe. their shared insights and discoveries are not just academic achievements; they are the building blocks for technological innovations that could transform industries and improve everyday life." filler served as conference chair and worked with an international steering committee to plan the event. 
 with more than 115 speakers and poster presenters representing more than 20 countries, the agenda reflected the diverse and evolving landscape of nanowire research. topics included nanowire growth and manufacturing, electron transport and doping in nanowires, quantum behavior and devices, energy conversion and storage, and more. 
 nanowires are 1d nanostructures with a wide range of potential uses. the ability of bottom-up growth methods to ‘program’ nanowire structure and composition with nanoscale precision opens the door to novel materials properties and functionality. 
 nanowire week takes place every 18 months and brings together leading experts in the world of nanowires. past locations include lund, sweden; hamilton, canada; pisa, italy; and chamonix, france. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 amelia neumeister 
 email 
 amelia.neumeister@research.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000