georgia tech ranks among top public universities in latest undergraduate rankings 
 u.s. news & world report releases 2023 best colleges rankings. 
 sep 12, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the georgia institute of technology continues to rank among the top public universities in the nation, and its programs remain among the best in the country, according to the 2023  u.s. news & world report  best colleges rankings.* 
 in the most recent report, released sept. 12, for the fifth year in a row, all 10 of georgia tech’s engineering programs placed in the top 5 in the nation, with seven of those programs placing either first or second in their discipline. georgia tech was also named no. 5 overall in best undergraduate computer science programs. more than 66% of georgia tech’s undergraduate students are enrolled in either engineering or computing. georgia tech was also ranked among the top 20 best undergraduate business programs in the country. 
 overall, georgia tech ranks no. 15 in the best public university category. georgia tech is ranked no. 44 among universities both public and private, sharing the spot with brandeis university, case western reserve university, northeastern university, and tulane university. among the nation’s most innovative universities, georgia tech ranks no. 8. in other categories highlighting academic excellence, georgia tech ranks no. 5 for co-op / internship programs, and moved up to no. 16 for senior capstone projects. 
 “we are proud to see our programs in engineering, computing, and other disciplines among the best in the nation,” said ángel cabrera, president of georgia tech. “we also appreciate being listed again among the best public universities in the nation, even if this year we showed five spots lower than last. our successful efforts to serve more students and lower costs penalize us in these rankings, which is unfortunate. at the same time, the rankings rightfully point out the need for us to do better in terms of social mobility. we have one of the best graduation rates in the nation for pell students, but we serve far fewer pell students than we should, and we need to keep working to change that.” 
 digging deeper into the numbers for the college of computing, four of tech’s computer science programs are ranked among the top 5 in the country, with game development at no. 3 and cybersecurity at no. 4. georgia tech’s artificial intelligence program ranks no. 6 among national universities. in holding its no. 5 overall computer science ranking, georgia tech is tied with cornell university, princeton university, and the university of illinois urbana-champaign. 
 in maintaining its no. 4 overall ranking for best undergraduate engineering programs, two schools at tech earned no. 1 rankings. the guggenheim school of aerospace engineering earned the no. 1 position for the first time, and the h. milton stewart school of industrial and systems engineering earned that recognition for the 28th straight year. 
 the scheller college of business holds the no. 19 spot for best undergraduate business programs, in a tie with the university of wisconsin madison, the university of minnesota-twin cities, and the university of washington. three of scheller’s business programs ranked in the top 5, with quantitative analysis at no. 4 and both business analytics and management information systems at no. 3. 
 georgia tech’s rankings also moved up for best undergraduate teaching, going from no. 58 to no. 41. 
 this is the season in which many college rankings are announced by organizations that follow higher education. each of those ranking groups use different criteria to arrive at their evaluations. here are some of this year’s other recent results: 
 no. 3 public university, according to niche. 
 no. 6 best value college in america, as ranked by money. 
 no. 12 public university, according to forbes. 
 no. 8 for return on investment, as ranked by payscale.com. 
 for additional ranking information please click 
 here . 
 *please note that this summary includes the latest rankings issued by u.s. news & world report this year. not all georgia tech colleges, schools, and subjects are ranked every year by this organization. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 ayana isles 
 media relations representative 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000