georgia tech economic development agency university center seeks applicants for community development studies, training 
 cares act funding support efforts to help communities recover from covid-19 impact 
 juli golemi is director of the georgia tech economic development agency university center. 
 jan 14, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 atlanta —  the  georgia tech economic development agency (eda) university center  is now accepting applications from communities in need of assistance to identify, define, and support its workforce talent. 
 to date, georgia public health officials report more than 1.5 million cases and 26,621 deaths from covid-19. the workforce analysis, which also includes the creation of skills development and talent pool programs, professional and leadership development, and core business training, is designed help communities recover from the economic impact of covid-19. 
 the georgia tech eda university center will provide workforce development services at no charge to communities, with all costs covered by a grant from the coronavirus aid, relief, and economic security (cares) act of 2020. 
 “as the state of georgia builds its resiliency and maximizes economic development potential for its communities, our goal with the cares act grant is to offer services that combine data collection and analysis with a training-driven approach,” said juli golemi, director of georgia tech’s eda university center program manager. “we’re committed to comprehensive stakeholder engagement that builds local capacity and economically stronger communities across the state.” 
 in addition to the workforce assessments, which typically take 60 to 70 days to complete, the georgia tech eda university center will provide technical assistance to entrepreneurs, businesses, and communities to assist in their recovery efforts from the impact of the coronavirus pandemic. 
 finally, golemi said the georgia tech team will conduct, share, and disseminate applied research to address specific challenges, meet defined needs, and solve select problems resulting from the coronavirus’ economic impact on communities, businesses, innovators, entrepreneurs, economic planners, and cluster-based industries. 
 “assessing all the data and turning research into action, we will make recommendations to direct future workforce development efforts that help communities navigate the changes to their employment and occupation environments,” golemi said. 
 to apply, please note: 
 applications are due jan. 21, 2022, and selected communities will be notified by jan. 30. 
 apply here:  https: / / gatech.co1.qualtrics.com / jfe / form / sv_caqogqnqjbg6ido . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 péralte c. paul 
 404.316.1210 
 peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu 
 email 
 peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu 
 additional information 
 about the georgia tech eda university center 
 the georgia tech eda university center is a program funded by the  department of commerce’s economic development administration (eda)  through its  eda university center . as part of the georgia institute of technology’s enterprise innovation institute, the university center has been assisting georgia communities for more than 50 years. its outreach activities promote job creation, development of high-skilled regional talent pools, business expansion in innovation clusters, and the development and expansion of regional economic ecosystems in georgia and other states within the eda’s atlanta region (alabama, florida, kentucky, mississippi, north carolina, south carolina, and tennessee). since july 1, 2017, the georgia tech eda university center team has worked on 27 projects, with 2 currently in progress. as of may 2021, the program’s work has helped create or save 321 jobs, $10.2 million in private investment, and $30.7 million in public investment. to learn more, visit  grow.gatech.edu / eda-university-center / grow.gatech.edu / eda-university-center / grow.gatech.edu / eda-university-center / . 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000