georgia tech alumnus m. brian blake named georgia state university president 
 georgia tech alumnus m. brian blake, provost and executive vice president for academic affairs at george washington university, has been named georgia state university’s first black president. 
 m. brian blake 
 jun 18, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 m. brian blake (ee '94), executive vice president for academic affairs and provost at george washington university, has been named the eighth president of 
 georgia state university 
 by the board of regents of the university system of georgia. the georgia institute of technology alumnus will become the first black president in the university’s history. 
 blake will succeed mark becker, who served for 12 years. as president, becker led georgia state to become the largest institution of higher education in the state and one of the top 10 in the nation by student enrollment. founded in 1913, georgia state touts a diverse majority-minority student population. 
 as george washington university provost, blake oversaw the academic mission of the institution, including its 14 schools and colleges. prior to joining george washington in 2019, blake was executive vice president for academics and provost at drexel university in philadelphia for four years. he was also vice provost for academic affairs and dean of the graduate school at the university of miami in coral gables, florida. 
 he was an associate dean for research and professor at the university of notre dame college of engineering, where he provided oversight for research programs and graduate studies. prior to notre dame, blake was on faculty at georgetown university, where he was chair of the department of computer science. 
 a georgia native, blake holds a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering from georgia tech, a master’s degree in electrical engineering from mercer university, and a ph.d. in information and software engineering from george mason university. 
 blake begins his tenure as georgia state university president on august 9. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 courtney hill 
 communications manager 
 institute diversity, equity, and inclusion 
 courtney.hill@gatech.edu 
 email 
 courtney.hill@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000