georgia tech chosen as partner institution for world-leading climate center 
 georgia tech will be a key partner for the new york climate exchange (the exchange), a first-of-its-kind international center for developing and deploying dynamic solutions to the global climate crisis. 
 apr 24, 2023 
 georgia tech will be a key partner for the new york climate exchange ( the exchange ), a first-of-its-kind international center for developing and deploying dynamic solutions to the global climate crisis. in addition to convening the world’s leaders and climate experts, the exchange will address the social and practical challenges created by climate change — including commercially viable research and ideas that lead to immediate action on local and global levels. 
 “today's climate issues are urgent, and environmental justice and ecological sustainability necessitate action from leaders across the world,” said chaouki abdallah, executive vice president for research at georgia tech. “as a core partner of the exchange, georgia tech will provide research expertise in the areas of energy, urban planning, bi­­ological ecosystems, public policy, and more, and we look forward to playing an instrumental role in bringing its mission to fruition.” 
 georgia tech researchers are studying glacial melt, coral growth, sea level rise, and other climate concerns in the state of georgia and around the world and will share their data and research results with partners at the exchange. likewise, research at the exchange will be applicable for towns and cities across georgia, allowing state leaders to take advantage of economic opportunities that arise when climate change is addressed head on. 
 in addition to contributing critical research across the many areas of climate change, georgia tech leads major initiatives that are focused on solving the crises laid out in the un’s sustainable development goals. 
 generation 2 reinvented toilet (g2rt) 
 — a solution to the world’s water and sanitation problem — is led by 
 shannon yee , associate professor in the 
 george w. woodruff school of mechanical engineering 
 at georgia tech. this cost-effective, globally scalable reinvented toilet with built-in human waste treatment will ensure that drinking water stays clean and will improve public health around the world. 
 georgia tech is also a leading partner of the 
 ocean visions 
 – un decade collaborative center for ocean-climate solutions, an international center headquartered at the georgia aquarium that aims to co-design, develop, test, fund, and deliver scalable and equitable ocean-based solutions to reduce the effects of climate change and build climate-resilient marine ecosystems and coastal communities. championed at georgia tech by 
 susan lozier, 
 dean and betsy middleton and john clark sutherland chair in the 
 college of sciences , the center also supports opportunities to accelerate ocean-based carbon dioxide removal research and advance sustainable ocean economies. 
 “we are looking forward to contributing and demonstrating some of the engineering sustainability solutions that have been developed at georgia tech with new york city and the world,” said yee. “many of the technical and economic solutions that serve the state of georgia, the coastal city of savannah, and the urban center of atlanta can also serve the urban harbor of new york city. similarly, the innovations and economic opportunities that address climate change can be shared with and benefit georgia. this collaboration embodies the concept of an exchange where we share with one another.” 
 as the exchange’s anchor institution, stony brook university will build and operate the center which will be located on governors island in new york city. the center is slated to open in 2028. 
 “it is becoming clear year after year in new york, and around the world, that the impacts of climate change are real and are here,” said kevin reed, associate dean for research and associate professor in the school of marine and atmospheric sciences at stony brook. “by partnering with communities, industries, governments, and universities, the exchange will help to accelerate the implementation of urban solutions to these climate impacts through an interactive research ecosystem where community engagement is paramount. as a climate scientist, i recognize that new yorkers need solutions to the climate crisis now, and the exchange will help to make that a reality.” 
 contact 
 news contact 
 georgia parmelee | georgia.parmelee@gatech.edu 
 email 
 georgia.parmelee@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000