georgia tech welcomes international soccer to bobby dodd 
 prepare for heavy pedestrian and road traffic around campus sunday, sept. 25. 
 bobby dodd stadium will play host to cd chivas de guadalajara and club américa,  in their súper clásico series. this rivalry game has been happening since 1943, is recognized a one of the premier international matchups. 
 sep 22, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 georgia tech's campus will be buzzing with soccer fans this weekend. two top professional teams from mexico are bringing their rivalry to atlanta on sunday. bobby dodd stadium will play host to cd chivas de guadalajara and club américa, in their súper clásico 
 series. this rivalry game has been happening since 1943 and is recognized as one of the premier international matchups. the fan bases for the two squads are among some of the largest in the world. 
 this event may lead to some congestion around campus, especially before and after the game. the opening kick is set for approximately 4:30 p.m. expect road closures and heavy foot and vehicle traffic before and after the game. parking permit holders are being asked to provide spaces for our guests, similar to georgia tech football games. please note that visitor and special events parking revenue plays a critical role in reducing faculty, staff, and student permit rates. 
 friday, sept. 23 
 to accommodate tv trucks, please move your vehicles from the following lots on friday by 6 p.m.: 
 lower e44: behind daniel lab 
 upper e44: behind emerson (a. french) and lyman hall 
 e44 permit holders may park in e52-peters deck on friday. gate access will be added to your buzzcard or carpool permit. sunday, sept. 25 
 please move your vehicles from the following  lots by 6 a.m. on sunday 
 e40 (klaus deck) 
 e45 (tech tower lot) 
 e46 (burge / north avenue) and e48 (wardlaw deck) 
 e49 (alumni lot) 
 e52 (peters deck) 
 er51: 
 fourth street 
 techwood drive from north avenue to fourth street 
 fowler street from fourth street to fifth street 
 r55: 
 fowler street from fifth street to sixth street 
 w01 (tech parkway) 
 w02 (student center deck) 
 w04 (procurement / business services / ohr) 
 visitors areas 1, 2, 6, 7, and 9 
 note : this includes all service and government vehicle spaces. any vehicles remaining in the aforementioned areas after the deadline may be relocated at the owner’s expense. all no parking zones and fire lanes must be kept clear at all times; vehicles in these areas will be relocated at the owner’s expense. alternate parking 
 you may begin parking in any of the areas listed below starting 
 friday, sept. 23, at any time through sunday, sept. 25: 
 w06: tech parkway / marietta street (excluding ivan allen college / habersham lot at 781 marietta street) 
 wr29: west campus housing area 
 w31: ipst 
 e70: gtri 
 you may park in the areas listed below on  friday, sept. 23, after 5 p.m. through sunday, sept. 25: 
 w10: crc deck 
 w22: dalney deck 
 w23: north deck 
 parking access for gated locations will be added to your buzzcard or carpool permit. note: 
 e81-tech square deck is not an alternate parking location. normal after-hours / weekend access for annual individual and carpool permits is not permitted on game day. this does not include evening / weekend permit access in e81-tech square deck. customers are responsible for paying the posted hourly rates if a ticket is pulled upon entry. 
 instructions for releasing towed vehicles 
 visit 
 driverseat.gatech.edu 
 and pay all existing fines online. once payment has been made, please call 404.385.7275 for instructions on retrieving the impounded vehicle. customers are responsible for paying any prior fines, including all citations received on game day, to release their vehicle. 
 customers may return to their assigned parking areas one hour after the game ends. all vehicles must be returned to assigned areas by 8 a.m. on monday, sept. 26.  vehicles that remain in alternate parking zones after this time are subject to citation. 
 if special exceptions are required, please contact parking and transportation services at 404.385.park (7275) for assistance. 
 transit operations for match day 
 sunday, sept. 25 
 the grocery shuttle will serve the transit hub, west campus housing, graduate / family housing, and atlantic station on sunday, sept. 25. it will not serve east campus. 
 the midnight rambler will operate normal service hours and levels on sunday, sept. 25. 
 the stingerette will operate normal service hours and levels on sunday, sept. 25. 
 please use the transloc mobile app or the 
 bus.gatech.edu 
 website to track the grocery shuttle and the midnight rambler 
 limited tickets for the súper clásico 
 are still available at 
 www.ramblinwreck.com / tickets 
 and 
 www. ticketon.com . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 steven norris 
 director, media relations and social media 
 email 
 snorris@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000