georgia tech wins real estate visionary award 
 honor from the atlanta business chronicle recognizes the development and continued success of technology square. 
 georgia tech's technology square is home to a growing innovation ecosystem of startup companies, innovation centers from established companies and research from institute students, faculty and staff. 
 mar 03, 2017 
 — atlanta, ga 
 georgia tech was honored thursday evening for the innovative and successful development of technology square. the institute received the visionary award in the atlanta business chronicle’s 2017 best in atlanta real estate awards. 
 tech square officially opened in 2003, and today the area is a thriving 
 innovation ecosystem 
 thanks to a vibrant network of students, faculty, researchers, startup entrepreneurs and global corporations. 
 one of the area’s guiding principles was to foster a better connection between the institute and the business community. 
 president g.p. “bud” peterson discussed this connection in the fall during a 
 roundtable event 
 with a handful of corporate executives from companies that opened innovation centers in tech square. currently, 14 
 corporate innovation centers 
 are clustered in the area. 
 the area’s growth will only continue between 
 construction of coda , which represents the next phase of tech square, and the recent 
 purchase of the biltmore . 
 “tech square will continue to be a hub of innovation for the southeast, and i think we’ll see continued strong growth as the word gets out that it is the place to be,” peterson 
 told the atlanta business chronicle . “we are grateful to those who first saw the potential of tech square before the first shovel full of dirt was moved, and to those who have worked to create one of the most vibrant and creative innovation regions in the southeastern united states.” 
 additional images 
 related links 
 the innovation ecosystem at georgia tech 
 contact 
 laura diamond 
 media relations 
 404-894-6016 
 @laurardiamond 
 email 
 laura.diamond@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000