georgia tech culture survey shows promising upward trend 
 responses in this year’s survey show more improvement in every category compared to 2022. 
 l.o.v.e. gt 
 oct 20, 2023 
 this spring, the georgia tech community engaged in the 2023 georgia tech culture survey, enabling faculty and staff to share feedback about their workplace experiences. the results provide valuable insights into our strengths and areas for improvement, as we work to better align our values and our daily practices. the survey elicited responses from 2,099 faculty and staff, with a response rate of 20.4%, a slight increase from 2021. 
 “all of us, regardless of our level or position, play an instrumental role in building our culture through our day-to-day activities. this year’s culture survey results show that we have made significant progress in living our values every day and illustrate that by working together we can co-create the culture to which we aspire,” said frank neville, chief of staff and senior vice president of strategic initiatives and the executive sponsor of the 
 l.o.v.e. gt  initiative. 
 key findings from the survey: 
 responses in this year’s survey show more improvement in every category compared to 2022. 
 73% of respondents “always” or “often” observe others demonstrating georgia tech values. 
 78% of respondents agree: 
 they are clear about their role’s contribution to institute priorities. 
 they feel inspired by the mission. 
 georgia tech is an excellent place to learn. 
 employees appreciate georgia tech’s diverse community, collaborative colleagues, flexible work environment, and high-caliber students. 
 areas for improvement included a desire to improve rewards and recognition and a need to improve psychological safety. 
 visit the 
 l.o.v.e. gt site 
 to view more data and insights from the 2023 culture survey results. 
 culture priority areas 
 in response to the feedback, the following efforts are currently underway: 
 honoring the contributions of faculty and staff through affirmation, expression of value, tangible and intangible rewards, and support for well-being and professional growth. 
 broadening the annual staff awards to recognize all nine georgia tech values and reorganizing job categories and compensation structures to increase career advancement options. 
 creating an environment where individuals are encouraged and believe it’s ok to speak up, challenge the status quo, and offer original ideas without fear of judgment or punishment. 
 institute-wide workshops on “psychological safety” and “leading congruently with values.” 
 staff culture advisory councils have been formed at various organizational levels, along with communications working groups and establishing a leadership competency model. 
 the survey results were reviewed by georgia tech’s senior leaders throughout the summer, and leaders have been equipped with the culture improvement toolkit, providing actionable insights into diverse perspectives, holistic learning, and growth. this toolkit provide provides practical advice on integrating core values into daily work, using best practices and positive communication. every department will work together with leaders and employees to improve their local workplace culture. 
 this year’s l.o.v.e. gt day is wednesday, oct. 25, from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m., on tech green. the event is open to faculty, staff, and students, offering a valuable opportunity to enjoy treats, receive swag, engage at department tables, and celebrate and recognize our community for living our values every day . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 victor rogers 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000