georgia tech ranks among top universities on u.s. news & world report’s list of best colleges 
 georgia tech ranks no. 10 in the best public university category, and ranked no. 38 among universities both public and private. 
 sep 13, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the georgia institute of technology continues to rank among the top public universities in the nation, and its programs remain among the best in the country, according to the 2022 
 u.s. news & world report 
 best colleges rankings*. 
 in the newest report, released sept. 13, georgia tech ranks no. 10 in the best public university category, along with the university of california davis, the university of texas at austin, and the college of william & mary. among universities both public and private, georgia tech is ranked no. 38 and shares that spot as well with the university of texas, william & mary, and uc davis. 
 “we are honored to be recognized once again as one of the leading public research universities in the u.s.,” said ángel cabrera, president of georgia tech. “we are innovating, expanding access, and developing a new generation of leaders who are ready to make a positive difference in the world, and i am delighted that our impact is not going unnoticed.” 
 additionally, four programs from the college of computing have made the top 10 for undergraduate computer science programs this year, with artificial intelligence at no. 6 and computer systems at no. 4. georgia tech’s software engineering program ranks no. 4 among national universities. the computer science program holds its no. 5 overall ranking in a tie with cornell and the university of illinois urbana-champaign. 
 tech’s college of engineering has maintained its fourth place overall ranking for best undergraduate engineering programs, with the h. milton stewart school of industrial and systems engineering and the undergraduate civil engineering program at no. 1 and no. 2, respectively. 
 the ernest scheller jr. college of business holds its no. 19 spot for best undergraduate business programs in a tie with the university of wisconsin madison, the university of minnesota twin cities, and the university of washington. three of scheller’s specialty business programs ranked in the top five, with both management information systems and quantitative analysis at no. 5 and business analytics at no. 3. 
 georgia tech’s rankings also moved for best colleges for veterans, going from no. 15 to no. 16. among the nation’s most innovative universities, georgia tech remains at no. 4. in other categories highlighting academic strength, georgia tech ranks no. 4 for co-op / internship programs, no. 14 for undergraduate research / creative projects, and no. 23 for both senior capstone projects and learning communities. 
 *please note that this summary includes the latest rankings issued by 
 u.s. news & world report 
 this year. not all colleges, schools, and subjects are ranked every year by this organization. 
 learn more about georgia tech's current rankings at 
 gatech.edu / about / rankings . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 siobhan rodriguez 
 institute communications 
 email 
 sar30@gatech.edu 
 additional information 
 national rankings* 
 no. 4 – undergraduate engineering programs 
 no. 5 – undergraduate computer science programs 
 no. 10 – public universities 
 no. 38 – national universities 
 specialty rankings – engineering 
 no. 1 – industrial engineering 
 no. 2 – aerospace engineering 
 no. 2 – civil engineering 
 no. 2 – chemical engineering 
 no. 2 – mechanical engineering 
 no. 3 – biomedical engineering 
 no. 3 – environmental engineering 
 no. 4 – materials engineering 
 no. 4 – electrical engineering 
 no. 5 – computer engineering 
 specialty rankings – business 
 no. 3 – business analytics 
 no. 5 – management information systems 
 no. 5 – quantitative analysis 
 no. 9 – supply chain management / logistics 
 no. 10 – production / operations management 
 specialty rankings – computer science 
 no. 2 – cybersecurity 
 no. 4 – software engineering 
 no. 6 – artificial intelligence 
 no. 7 – data analytics 
 no. 9 – supply chain management / logistics 
 no. 12 – programming 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000