georgia tech, university of waterloo forge partnership to advance ai initiatives 
 georgia tech and waterloo collaborate to enhance academic and research partnerships, with a focus on areas such as ai, faculty exchanges, and joint research projects. 
 feb 12, 2024 
 the university of waterloo and the board of regents of the university system of georgia, representing georgia institute of technology (georgia tech), have officially entered a memorandum of understanding (mou) to strengthen academic and research ties between the two institutions. the mou signifies a commitment to fostering collaborative initiatives in research, education, and other areas of mutual interest. both universities, recognized for their global impact and innovation, are eager to embark on this journey of cooperation. 
 charmaine dean, vice-president of research & international, shared, “the university of waterloo is pleased to embark on a new collaboration with georgia tech, featuring faculty and student exchanges, joint research projects, dual degrees, and conferences. strengthening ties between our institutions through this collaboration creates a dynamic environment for our faculty and students to foster innovation in many areas of mutual excellence.” 
 “georgia tech is excited to see its 
 nsf ai institute for advances in optimization 
 (ai4opt), under the leadership of prof. pascal van hentenryck, partner with experts from the waterloo artificial intelligence institute of the university of waterloo. i am really looking forward to the impact that this partnership will have in advancing the fundamental knowledge of ai, in further expanding its applications, and in enabling its wider adoption,” noted prof. bernard kippelen, vice provost for international initiatives at georgia tech. 
 this collaboration is poised to elevate the academic and research landscape of both institutions, promoting global engagement and creating opportunities for students and faculty to thrive in an interconnected world. 
 contact 
 breon martin 
 email 
 breon.martin@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000