georgia tech named a center of knowledge interchange partner by siemens 
 global technology company siemens has named georgia tech a center of knowledge interchange (cki) partner. 
 georgia tech signs on 10th street (photo credit: fitrah hamid) 
 oct 09, 2015 
 — atlanta, ga 
 global technology company siemens has named georgia tech a center of knowledge interchange (cki) partner. as a cki partner, georgia tech joins a global group of eight elite research universities, including the university of california, berkeley. the cki designation expands a long-time research relationship between georgia tech and siemens focused on developing the next generation of scientists and engineers, and accelerating the deployment of advanced technologies in a range of industries, including power generation, advanced manufacturing, industrial automation and health care. initial technical focus areas for the agreement will also include programs in system design, combustion, advanced manufacturing and materials science. “georgia tech is one of the leading research institutions in this country, paving the way for new ideas and technologies to help redefine the way we manufacture goods, power our homes, travel through space and more,” said eric spiegel, president and ceo, siemens usa. “building upon our strong relationship, this comprehensive partnership will continue to produce cutting-edge research and innovative industrial automation and digitalization software, while preparing highly trained students to join the global manufacturing workforce.” the cki agreement is the progression of a collaborative relationship between siemens and georgia tech that spans nearly two decades and a wide range of domains from energy and advanced manufacturing to health care and joint government contracting. in the last three years, georgia tech has partnered with siemens on more than 20 projects. “georgia tech and siemens have enjoyed a long productive relationship, working together in everything from advanced manufacturing to engineering software used in the curriculum,” said georgia tech president g.p. “bud” peterson. “as a siemens cki partner, we look forward to expanding our collaborative efforts to further drive advanced manufacturing research, software and innovation.” 
 additional images 
 related links 
 siemens announcement 
 strategic energy institute siemens announcement 
 contact 
 jason maderer national media relations 
 maderer@gatech.edu 404-660-2926 
 email 
 jason.maderer@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000