georgia tech joins america’s top-ranked universities at hannover messe 2016 
 the georgia institute of technology will participate in hannover messe 2016, considered the world’s largest industrial technology event. 
 a close up of tech tower (photo credit: ethan trewhitt) 
 apr 18, 2016 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the georgia institute of technology will participate in hannover messe 2016, considered the world’s largest industrial technology event. georgia tech will be part of the united states pavilion in the research and technology trade fair that takes place in hanover, germany, april 25 - 29, 2016. georgia tech continues to be a leader in establishing global innovation portals and partnerships, research and education hubs, and select branch campuses such as georgia tech lorraine in metz, france. through the use of distance learning and other technologies to deliver educational and research products to students, researchers, governments and businesses around the world, georgia tech will showcase its global impact during hannover messe 2016. as one of the united states’ leading institutes for research and commercialization, georgia tech focuses much of its research on the needs of its business, industry and government partners. georgia tech will also be highlighting its leadership in advanced manufacturing, robotics and energy, as well as its basic and applied research in manufacturing, trade and logistics that is supported by its strengths in materials and management. “georgia tech is in the fortunate position of being one of a few global institutions continually called upon by universities, companies and governments from around the world to assist in their efforts to grow science, business and technology in an increasingly innovation-centric economy,” said georgia tech president g.p. “bud” peterson. “we are proud to join the u.s. department of commerce’s selectusa initiative at hannover messe to highlight the many advantages the united states offers as a location for business and investment.” as part of the honor of the united states being designated as the partner country at hannover messe 2016, american academic and technology institutes will be awarded the global spotlight on their world-class faculty members, student talents, research programs and educational opportunities. the event offers visitors the chance to connect with more than 20 u.s. institutions to discover exciting research and spinoffs and to network for potential partnerships and innovation projects. the complete list of u.s. academic, technology institutes and exhibitors is located at this link: 
 http: / / export.gov / hannovermesse / exhibitors / . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 hannover messe exhibitors 
 contact 
 lance wallace lance.wallace@comm.gatech.edu 
 email 
 lance.wallace@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000