georgia tech admission announces decisions 
 georgia tech's incoming class is not only academically talented, but also extremely diverse. 
 raheem beyah (bottom), dean and southern company chair in georgia tech’s college of engineering, joined ellery kirkconnell (right), senior admission counselor in undergraduate admission, to virtually congratulate two students from peach county, georgia on their acceptance to tech. (photo courtesy of undergraduate admission) 
 mar 18, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 this year, 45,350 students applied to become part of the 2021 first-year class at georgia tech. of those applicants, 18% were offered admission, including 2,785 on saturday, march 13. they join the 5,320 students who were admitted in december and january as part of the early action 1 and 2 rounds. 
 this year’s admitted students are not only academically talented, but also extremely diverse. the 
 2021 admitted class 
 includes 28% more black students, 20% more first-generation students, and 12% more hispanic students than were offered admission last year. 
 “georgia tech’s new strategic plan is clear that expanding access and amplifying impact are institutional priorities. as a result, we are growing the size of our incoming class by 5%, to 3,450, as well as enrolling more georgians than ever before,” said rick clark, director of undergraduate admission. 
 after months of reading applications, the admission team now turns its attention to convincing these students to choose tech. “most of our accepted students not only have admission offers from several other great schools around the country, but frequently they receive generous scholarships and financial aid awards as well,” clark said. 
 in a normal spring, several thousand students and their families would visit atlanta for tours of campus and sessions tailored to their academic interests. due to the pandemic, however, that will not be the case this year. instead, undergraduate admission will be hosting virtual programs and events to connect admitted students to current students and one another. 
 clark noted that, “this year, more than ever before, it is imperative that our entire campus community step up to congratulate, welcome, and engage our admitted students and their families.” 
 since tech’s deposit deadline is monday, may 3, most academic units have begun hosting virtual information sessions, and several deans and school chairs are writing and calling their admitted students. departments looking for ways to engage in these efforts should contact the office of undergraduate admission. 
 on march 12, raheem beyah, dean and southern company chair in georgia tech’s college of engineering, joined the recruitment efforts by 
 virtually congratulating two students 
 from peach county high school in peach county, georgia on their acceptances. 
 “having the opportunity to tell kennede and ariam that they got in was an honor,” beyah said. “these high school seniors who will join us in the fall are the absolute best and brightest, and we at the college are lucky to have them choose georgia tech to pursue their degree. all of our newly accepted students will do amazing things here at tech, and we are all looking forward to witnessing their journey.” 
 georgia tech’s overall decision breakdown (including early action 1 and 2, and regular decision): 
 admitted: 18% 
 georgia admit rate: 32% 
 non-georgia admit rate: 14% 
 while many applicants were not offered admission to the first-year class, more than 8,500 received a one- or two-year transfer pathway. over the last few years the office of undergraduate admission has consistently added these programs to provide students another route to a georgia tech degree, including the newest one, the 
 atlanta public schools pathway program . in fact, last year 53% of tech’s more than 1,100 transfer students entered through one of these eight 
 pathways . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 2021 admitted class 
 transfer pathway programs 
 contact 
 victor rogers 
 institute communications 
 email 
 victor.rogers@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000