georgia tech joins new coalition aimed at improving college admission process 
 goal is to motivate a stronger college-going mindset among students of all backgrounds, especially those from low-income families and underrepresented groups. 
 tech tower (photo credit: gary meek) 
 sep 28, 2015 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the georgia institute of technology is among more than 80 public and private colleges united in a new effort to improve the college admission application process for all students. the coalition for access, affordability, and success is committed to making college more affordable and accessible for students from diverse backgrounds and to helping students earn degrees. over the next few months, the coalition will develop tools and processes intended to address many of the barriers that prevent students from attending college or successfully earning a degree. the coalition, which was announced monday, is developing a free platform of online tools to streamline planning for and applying to college. the first phase of tools will be available to high school freshmen, sophomores and juniors beginning in january 2016. in creating this platform, members hope to motivate a stronger college-going mindset among students of all backgrounds, especially those from low-income families and underrepresented groups who have historically had less access to leading colleges. "georgia tech is committed to promoting college access for all students, and participation in the coalition for access, affordability, and success is a positive step in pursuit of that goal," said rick clark, director of undergraduate admission at georgia tech. "additionally, we believe this platform will reduce unnecessary stress, help students and their families identify excellent college options, and put their best foot forward in the college admission process.”   that stress can create barriers for students, most notably for those who are the first in their families to attend college. the coalition hopes to address these challenges through its free online tools and increased transparency around admissions and financial aid. later this year, the coalition will share details about new college planning and application tools that will streamline admission and financial aid processes, which will allow students to begin planning for college much earlier in their high school years. the online tools – which will include a digital portfolio, a collaboration platform, and an application portal – will make students more familiar with the application process and give everyone the same opportunities for college success. more information and a list of participating colleges and universities can be found at coalitionforcollegeaccess.org. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 laura diamond  georgia tech media relations 404-894-6016   julie peterson coalition for access, affordability, and success 773-612-1515 
 email 
 laura.diamond@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000