georgia tech internet of things center managing director to moderate panel at converge 2018 
 cdait managing director alain louchez will moderate panel of industry leaders. 
 converge 2018 conference at the georgia tech hotel and conference center september 10. 
 aug 20, 2018 
 — atlanta, ga 
 georgia tech’s center for the development and application of internet of things technologies  (cdait) managing director alain louchez will moderate a panel on the transformative nature of the internet of things (iot) at the iot converge 2018 conference at the georgia tech hotel and conference center in atlanta on sept. 10. 
 the goal of the panel, which will include distinguished representatives from cdait member companies, is to understand how iot is being leveraged to create new value for customers, enable new revenue streams and generate overall efficiencies across diverse industry relationships and value chains. 
 louchez will be joined by robert bauer, managing director, head of innovation & sharing economy practice group at aig; sébastien lafon, vp, global head of digital & marketing services at boehringer ingelheim; and tim weidenbach, svp sales and customer operations at landis+gyr. 
 iot converge 2018 will bring together the brightest minds in iot for an immersive experience that spotlights the iot convergence connecting multiple industries, driving business growth and igniting the technology ecosystem. attracting international companies and speakers, iot converge 2018 is an exclusive opportunity to interact with 500 tech professionals, hear from globally recognized keynote speakers, engage in eight curated breakout sessions and demo next-gen solutions with 30-plus innovators. 
 “the annual technology association of georgia (tag) iot symposium is always a must-attend event for anyone interested in keeping up with developments in the space,” louchez said. “this year is no exception as, by many accounts, iot technologies are increasingly seen as foundational to companies’ digital transformation.” 
 for more information about iot converge 2018, visit 
 www.iotconvergeatl.com . 
 about cdait 
 the center for the development and application of internet of things technologies is a georgia tech global, nonprofit, partner-funded center located in atlanta, georgia that fosters interdisciplinary research and education while driving general awareness about the iot’s huge potential and transformational capabilities. cdait aims at efficiently identifying, understanding and solving challenges and problems that may arise along the entire internet of things value chain through six working groups: iot education and training; iot startup ecosystem; iot thought leadership; iot security and privacy; iot standards and management; and iot research. learn more about cdait at 
 www.cdait.gatech.edu . 
 about the technology association of georgia (tag) 
 tag is the leading technology industry association in the state, serving more than 35,000 members through regional chapters in metro atlanta, athens, augusta, columbus, macon / middle georgia and savannah. tag’s mission is to educate, promote, influence and unite georgia’s technology community to foster an innovative and connected marketplace that stimulates and enhances a tech-based economy. additionally, the tag education collaborative (tag’s charitable arm) focuses on helping science, technology, engineering and mathematics (stem) education initiatives thrive. for more information visit the tag website at www.tagonline.org or tag’s community website at 
 http: / / www.hubga.com 
 . to learn about the tag-ed collaborative visit 
 http: / / www.tagedonline.org / . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 converge 2018 
 contact 
 lance.wallace@comm.gatech.edu 
 email 
 lance.wallace@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000