georgia tech to launch sustainability-focused technology initiative at the advanced technology development center 
 norfolk southern commits $750,000 to the institute to support development of sustainability technology entrepreneurs and startups in georgia 
 josh raglin, norfolk southern's chief sustainability officer. (photo: norfolk southern corp.) 
 nov 15, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 norfolk southern corp. , one of the nation’s leading transportation companies, is making a significant commitment to georgia tech’s  advanced technology development center (atdc)  to create a new initiative for entrepreneurs in sustainability-focused technology. 
 the atdc sustainability technology program will formally launch in january 2023. atlanta-based norfolk southern’s gift will provide the initial funding to support the current and future sustainability-related startups in atdc’s portfolio. 
 the gift of $750,000 will support the initiative for three years. it is the eighth industry-focused vertical of its kind at atdc, including two others announced earlier in 2022 — one in robotics and automation, the other in supply chain logistics. 
 "norfolk southern and georgia tech are teaming up to support forward-thinking innovation around sustainability. together, some of the brightest minds in georgia and the business community can continue to make sustainable progress for our nation’s supply chain and economy," said josh raglin, chief sustainability officer for norfolk southern. 
 the sponsorship furthers the company’s strategic goal of integrating  sustainability  into daily operations while helping its customers achieve their sustainability goals. “through our collaboration with atdc and the incubator's sustainability vertical, we will join with students and entrepreneurs in the business of a better planet as they transform their revolutionary ideas into actionable and successful business models," raglin said. 
 the gift will support one-on-one coaching via a dedicated atdc startup catalyst who will manage the sustainability vertical and work to build the pipeline of innovators from across georgia who are in this space and scaling disruptive technologies to bring to the marketplace. 
 the funds also will support a sustainability-focused curriculum and other resources specialized to those entrepreneurs’ needs as they go from ideation to commercialization. 
 “atdc has a history of supporting startups with sustainable tech innovations including suniva, emergy, and quest renewables,” said john avery, atdc director. 
 atdc’s startup portfolio already includes 12 companies in the sustainability space, but avery said there is a wider opportunity for georgia entrepreneurs. 
 with norfolk southern’s sustainability focus, georgia tech’s research innovations in that area through centers such as the  strategic energy institute , and atdc’s ability to leverage those resources and its record in scaling successful technology companies, avery said georgia is primed to grow that sector. 
 the state is home to 34 companies on the fortune 1000 list, many of which have set their own sustainability goals. fifteen of those companies are headquartered in atlanta, which ranks third in the country for the number of fortune 500 companies headquartered in the city. 
 what's more, sustainability innovations can have wider impact across a number of industries that are important to georgia in addition to transportation and logistics, such as agriculture, and renewable energy, avery said. 
 “with norfolk southern at the forefront of sustainability innovation and its support of our dedicated sustainability vertical at atdc, we are doubling down on one of the biggest opportunities for startups and innovators today and pursuing a very important corporate and societal goal,” he said. “we can become a hub for all of these sustainability entrepreneurs and their innovations and grow this ecosystem in georgia by helping to launch viable companies across the state.” 
 additional images 
 contact 
 for norfolk southern, contact alyssa b. thomason 
 404.784.5564 alyssa.thomason@nscorp.com 
 for atdc, contact péralte c. paul 
 404.316.1210 peralte@atdc.org 
 email 
 peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu 
 additional information 
 about norfolk southern 
 since 1827, norfolk southern corporation (nyse: nsc) and its predecessor companies have safely moved the goods and materials that drive the u.s. economy. today, it operates a customer-centric and operations-driven freight transportation network. committed to furthering sustainability, norfolk southern helps its customers avoid 15 million tons of yearly carbon emissions by shipping via rail. its dedicated team members deliver more than 7 million carloads annually, from agriculture to consumer goods, and is the largest rail shipper of auto products and metals in north america. norfolk southern also has the most extensive intermodal network in the eastern u.s., serving a majority of the country’s population and manufacturing base, with connections to every major container port on the atlantic coast as well as the gulf of mexico and great lakes. learn more by visiting  www.norfolksouthern.com . 
 about georgia tech 
 the georgia institute of technology, or georgia tech, is a public research university developing leaders who advance technology and improve the human condition. the institute offers business, computing, design, engineering, liberal arts, and sciences degrees. its nearly 44,000 students representing 50 states and 149 countries, study at the main campus in atlanta, at campuses in france and china, and through distance and online learning. as a leading technological university, georgia tech is an engine of economic development for georgia, the southeast, and the nation, conducting more than$1 billion in research annually for government, industry, and society. 
 about the advanced technology development center (atdc) 
 the advanced technology development center (atdc), a program of the georgia institute of technology’s enterprise innovation institute, is the state’s technology startup incubator. founded in 1980 by the georgia general assembly which funds it each year, atdc’s mission is to work with entrepreneurs in georgia to help them learn, launch, scale, and succeed in the creation of viable, disruptive technology companies. since its founding, atdc has grown to become the longest running and one of the most successful university-affiliated incubators in the united states, with its graduate startup companies raising $3 billion in investment financing and generating more than $12 billion in revenue in the state of georgia. to learn more, visit  atdc.org . 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000