georgia tech launches climate action planning process 
 georgia tech strives to be a leader in climate action across the institute’s operational, educational, research, and economic development missions. 
 jan 10, 2023 
 — atlanta, ga 
 georgia tech strives to be a leader in climate action across the institute’s operational, educational, research, and economic development missions. as such, a process is underway to leverage this knowledge and develop a comprehensive, cross-cutting climate action plan. 
 the climate action plan, a key deliverable of the 
 sustainability next plan , will support the georgia tech strategic plan efforts to 
 lead by example 
 in solving some of the most pressing issues of our time. once developed, this plan will lay the pathway forward for the institute to achieve its climate goals, including reaching carbon neutrality by 2050. 
 about the process 
 the planning process launched last year and will extend through 2023. led by infrastructure and sustainability, the process will include developing a greenhouse gas inventory, modeling potential mitigation strategies, and engaging with faculty, students, and staff from across campus. the engagement process will include an advisory task force and individual working groups that focus on specific climate solutions. once complete, the plan will align with georgia tech’s broader commitments to address climate change and provide an actionable roadmap to achieving carbon neutrality and climate justice. 
 get involved 
 the georgia tech campus community is invited to take part in helping to develop the climate action plan. reach out to 
 sustain@gatech.edu 
 to express your interest. for additional information on the climate action plan and other sustainability efforts across campus, please follow the office of campus sustainability on 
 instagram 
 and 
 facebook 
 and visit 
 sustain.gatech.edu . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 sustainability next plan virtual town hall 
 contact 
 abby bower 
 program support coordinator 
 office of campus sustainability 
 infrastructure and sustainability 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000