georgia tech entrepreneurship programs and activities featured in ieee potentials 
 the may / june 2021 issue of ieee potentials introduces engineering entrepreneurship in both academic and corporate settings to the magazine’s readers, which are primarily undergraduate and graduate student members of ieee and young professionals. 
 may 20, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the may / june 2021 issue of 
 ieee potentials 
 introduces engineering entrepreneurship in both academic and corporate settings to the magazine’s readers, which are primarily undergraduate and graduate student members of ieee and young professionals. 
 the articles in this issue–mostly written by faculty and staff from six units at the georgia institute of technology and by two of its alumni–consistently underscore the working definition of entrepreneurship. they also demonstrate and highlight strategies and programs that are formative for engineering entrepreneurship as well as intrapreneurship, the corporate analog of entrepreneurship. these articles include: 
 an introduction to entrepreneurship 
 by pamela bhatti 
 academic entrepreneurship 
 by pamela bhatti and srini tridandapani 
 create-x: toward student entrepreneurial confidence 
 by craig r. forest, raghupathy sivakumar, raymond p. vito, rahul saxena, joyelle harris, rhea perkins, desta davidson, karthik ramachandran, keith mcgreggor, olufisayo omojokun, christopher klaus, and steven w. mclaughlin 
 building entrepreneurial confidence 
 by gregory mihalik and henry owen 
 coaching students and teams to listen to customer needs 
 by sara martin henderson, leah attruia, and melissa bolen heffner 
 would you be interested in a corporate startup? 
 by mike tinskey 
 for those who are interested in reading the articles and are unable to sign in with member access or institutional sign in, please visit the 
 ieee xplore subscriptions page . 
 related links 
 school of electrical and computer engineering 
 enterprise innovation institute 
 george w. woodruff school of mechanical engineering 
 college of computing 
 scheller college of business 
 provost's office 
 georgia tech 
 ieee potentials 
 contact 
 jackie nemeth 
 school of electrical and computer engineering 
 email 
 jackie.nemeth@ece.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000