georgia tech co-sponsors france-atlanta 2020 with a lineup of virtual events 
 georgia tech and the consulate general of france in atlanta come together for the 11th annual france-atlanta event series, which starts oct. 1. 
 france-atlanta logo 
 sep 28, 2020 
 — atlanta, ga 
 georgia tech is once again proud to partner with the consulate general of france in atlanta for the 11th annual france-atlanta event series, designed to foster cooperation and exchange in the fields of science, business, culture, and humanitarian affairs. while this year’s slate of events will be held virtually due to the ongoing pandemic, there is no shortage of excitement to celebrate the values of innovation, excellence, and collaboration in our interconnected world. 
 on october 1, georgia tech president ángel cabrera will join a panel to formally launch france-atlanta 2020, with a discussion on how the united nation (un)’s sustainable development goals (sdgs) have encouraged french-american cooperation. cabrera will be joined by jonathan gilad, counselor for ecology, sustainable development, energy, and transport for the embassy of france in the u.s .   ambassador of france to the u.s. philippe etienne and atlanta mayor keisha lance bottoms will provide prerecorded opening remarks. rickey bevington, senior anchor / correspondent at georgia public broadcasting, will moderate the discussion. 
 the 17 un sdgs are integral to georgia tech’s new strategic plan, demonstrating tech’s commitment to advancing these goals. the panel discussion will also address how georgia tech is grappling with the sdgs. and it will explore, too, how tech’s actions will reverberate within the city of atlanta, the southeast, tech’s global campuses, and even wider still, and how france has advanced in implementing the sdgs. 
 the opening event will be held at 6:30 p.m. via zoom, and the georgia tech community is encouraged to participate. register for the virtual launch at 
 us02web.zoom.us / webinar / register / wn_toxqv2bith2tvt_ytwdkjq 
 events will be held from october 1 through november 10 and will include a variety of scientific, business, cultural, and humanitarian topics. several georgia tech departments will sponsor seminars and workshops. for a full list of events and to register, go to 
 france-atlanta.org. / 
 additional images 
 contact 
 denise ward 
 institute communications 
 email 
 denise.ward@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000