get tested. get vaccinated. get rewarded. 
 georgia tech is introducing new rewards to encourage individuals on campus to get vaccinated and test weekly. 
 free t-shirts and local restaurant discounts are popping up at tech's covid-19 asymptomatic surveillance testing sites on campus, thanks to help from volunteers like allison vermaak, joint vice president of sustainability and infrastructure for undergraduate sga. 
 aug 29, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 georgia tech continues to take a multipronged approach to preventing and mitigating the risk of coronavirus as more students, faculty, and staff return to campus this fall. without question, the vaccine offers the best defense against the pandemic, and, if you have not done so, we urge you to consult with a medical professional and 
 consider getting vaccinated now . doing so at tech is easy and free. 
 additionally, all students, faculty, and staff are encouraged to participate each week in our free asymptomatic surveillance testing program, even if you have been fully vaccinated. we especially urge those who have not yet been vaccinated to get tested weekly. find 
 campus testing sites and locations . 
 beginning today, georgia tech is introducing new rewards to encourage individuals to get vaccinated and test weekly: 
 all students, faculty, and staff who get vaccinated at 
 stamps health services 
 or participate in our 
 campus surveillance testing program 
 between now and end of day september 30, 2021, will be entered into a drawing to receive a 
 $50 barnes & noble at georgia tech gift card . 
 350 individuals will be randomly selected 
 the following week to each receive a gift card. 
 additionally, all students, faculty, and staff vaccinated on campus between now and end of day september 10, 2021, will also receive a 
 $20 barnes & noble at georgia tech gift card . 
 through september 10, more than 
 1,000 $5 coupons for local restaurants , 
 350 limited edition georgia tech athletics t-shirts , and several 
 helmets and footballs signed by coach geoff collins 
 will also be distributed at random to campus test sites and vaccine clinics. 
 cookie drops 
 continue at test sites, along with 
 stickers 
 at test sites and vaccine clinics. 
 if you are unvaccinated, you are at risk of contracting covid-19 and infecting others, with potentially severe consequences for you or someone else. please seek medical advice from your healthcare provider or a member of our 
 stamps health services 
 team, led by dr. ben holton, if you have doubts or concerns about getting vaccinated. 
 like you, we want this academic year to be as safe as possible. the best way to achieve that outcome is for every member of the campus community to get vaccinated and continue to test weekly. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 kristen bailey 
 institute communications 
 jess hunt-ralston 
 college of sciences 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000