get tested, get rewarded 
 for those who have already been participating in weekly surveillance testing on campus, thank you for helping to keep our campus community safe. and for those who haven’t, now is the time to start. 
 surveillance testing 
 sep 16, 2020 
 — atlanta, ga 
 for those who have already been participating in weekly surveillance testing on campus, thank you for helping to keep our campus community safe. and for those who haven’t, now is the time to start. 
 beginning this week, everyone who completes a covid-19 test weekly at a campus surveillance 
 testing location 
 between sept. 14 and nov. 12 will be entered into a drawing for a grand prize at the end of the semester. the prize will include a free campus parking permit for the spring semester, donated by parking and transportation services; a private, physically distanced lunch with president ángel cabrera; and an ultimate game day apparel package donated by georgia tech athletics. all students, faculty, and staff are eligible to win. 
 to enter, simply get tested at least once a week (for a total of nine weeks) and scan your buzzcard at the testing site. no other submission is required. the winner will be notified on nov. 13 and will be required to claim the prize by nov. 20. testing more than once a week will not result in additional entries. 
 residence hall competition 
 residence halls also have an opportunity to win a prize for their regular participation in testing. the residence hall association is hosting 
 treats for testing , which will award the winning hall a food truck parked outside their building and free meals for all residents. 
 learn more about the program . 
 where to go to get tested 
 view a list of current testing locations and operating hours . 
 more about tech’s surveillance testing program 
 to date, georgia tech’s surveillance testing program has processed more than 38,000 samples and identified nearly 580 positive cases. regular asymptomatic surveillance testing is key to stopping the spread of the coronavirus. view more results from the program at 
 health.gatech.edu / surveillance-testing-program-results . 
 georgia tech’s testing program was designed by faculty and staff experts. along the way, they have hosted virtual discussions about the program, the science behind it, and what the current numbers mean. 
 learn more about the program 
 and 
 view their most recent presentation from sept. 10 . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 campus testing hours and locations 
 rha treats for testing 
 surveillance testing program results 
 about the surveillance testing program 
 contact 
 sara warner 
 student life 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000