getting ready for registration: removing a financial responsibility hold 
 as each new semester begins, some students may find themselves reaching out to the office of the bursar in order to remove holds from their accounts. 
 removing a financial responsibility hold 
 nov 16, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 as each new semester begins, some students may find themselves reaching out to the 
 office of the bursar 
 in order to remove holds from their accounts. 
 a hold is meant to draw attention to an aspect of a student account that needs to be addressed. once the demand of the hold is addressed, it is released by the appropriate department. 
 the financial responsibility agreement hold tends to be the most discussed account hold. it was put in place to ensure that students understand their financial obligations to the university system of georgia upon registering for courses. (a detailed description can be found 
 here .) 
 the process of clearing a 
 financial responsibility agreement 
 hold is fairly straightforward and can be done by students themselves, without the need of the bursar’s office. in order to clear the hold, students should log in to 
 oscar.gatech.edu , then access the registration menu on their account. once on the registration menu page, locate the financial responsibility agreement link. from there, read the agreement, enter your initials, and click “submit.” 
 once you have done this, your hold will be released, and you will be able to continue with the registration process. 
 “our staff loves working with students and we are always available to help students find solutions to their issues,” said robert zuco, customer service manager for the office of the bursar. questions may be emailed to 
 bursar.ask@business.gatech.edu , or call 404.894.4618. 
 phase 1 registration is underway through friday, dec. 16. for other registration questions, visit 
 registrar.gatech.edu . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 financial responsibility hold 
 office of the bursar 
 contact 
 robert zuco 
 office of the bursar 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000