getting ready for election day, voting on campus 
 election day, nov. 8, is just around the corner. georgia tech is here to support you as you navigate the voting process. 
 voting at mccamish pavilion in october 2020 
 oct 25, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 election day, nov. 8, is just around the corner. georgia tech is here to support you as you navigate the voting process. exercising the right to vote allows individuals the opportunity to engage with their local community, as well as the nation — each and every vote counts. 
 for georgia voters, there are several ways to vote, including on georgia tech’s campus this week for those who are registered in fulton county. 
 here’s what you should know before you vote: 
 voting on campus 
 voters registered in fulton county can participate in early voting on campus oct. 25 – 26 at the ferst center for the arts. 
 learn more about early voting in fulton county . 
 election day 
 election day is tuesday, nov. 8. anyone who plans to vote in person must vote at their designated polling location. to check your georgia polling location, visit 
 mvp.sos.ga.gov . 
 at georgia polling locations, voters are required to bring a form of id. here are the types of accepted identification: 
 a georgia driver's license. 
 a photo id issued by a state or federal government agency. 
 a valid u.s. passport. 
 an employee id card containing your photograph and issued by any branch, department, agency, or entity of the u.s. government, georgia, or any county, municipality, board, authority, or other entity of georgia. 
 a valid u.s. military id card. 
 a valid tribal id card. 
 if you do not have one of the above forms of id, georgia offers a free voter identification card. 
 voting absentee 
 absentee ballots may be requested any time between 78 and 11 calendar days prior to election day. to vote by absentee ballot, the ballot must be delivered by 7 p.m. on election day. to request an absentee ballot, the information entered online must match your voter registration record. 
 in georgia, any registered voter can vote by absentee ballot. georgia voters can request an absentee ballot 
 here 
 or at 
 securemyabsenteeballot.sos.ga.gov / s / . 
 policies and campus resources 
 georgia tech encourages full participation in the electoral process. per 
 section 8.2.7.7 
 of the 
 usg’s general personnel policies , employees are encouraged to exercise their constitutional right to vote in all federal, state, and local elections. per 
 section 4.1.3 
 of the 
 usg’s general student affairs policy , students are also encouraged to vote in all federal, state, and local elections. a student whose class schedule would otherwise prevent them from voting will be permitted an excused absence for the interval reasonably required for voting. for more information, visit 
 usg.edu . 
 in 2020, georgia tech’s faculty executive board passed a motion brought forth by representatives from the student government association (sga) requesting that teaching faculty provide academic consideration for student voters on election day. specifically, the sga motion requested that, for election day, faculty move lectures to an asynchronous format; avoid scheduling in-class quizzes, tests, or assessments; and make lecture recordings available to students unable to attend class that day. the faculty executive board passed the motion, clarifying that, although classes will still be in session, faculty members are strongly encouraged to consider making these modifications in order to give georgia tech students ample opportunity to participate in the election. 
 learn more about the motion. 
 additional campus resources related to voting are available at 
 gov.gatech.edu / vote . 
 while you are encouraged to engage in the normal political processes, particularly to take time to 
 vote , please be reminded that usg employees are not permitted to manage or enter political campaigns while on duty to perform services for the usg. you also have a right to express your political views on matters of public concern. if you highlight georgia tech or the usg in a bio for a speaking engagement or on social media, and you choose to engage in political activity or political expression, it is important that you make clear that you are speaking on your own behalf and not in your capacity as an employee of the usg or georgia tech. 
 furthermore, georgia tech does not tolerate harassment, discrimination, or unprofessional conduct. employees are prohibited from telling anyone who to vote for, wearing political clothing, or displaying political memorabilia at work. usg employees are prohibited from using state property, resources, or materials (including work email) or work time to communicate personal political views or in conjunction with any political campaigning. employees are prohibited from using any usg registered trademarks when expressing personal opinions on political issues unless authorized to do so. for more information, refer to the 
 board of regents policy manual sec. 8.2.18.3 . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 voting information 
 contact 
 cara cramer 
 institute relations 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000