gov. kemp taps center for economic development research director for coronavirus task force 
 alfie meek is one of three economists to serve on the task force. 
 alfie meek is an economist and director of the center for economic development research at georgia tech's enterprise innovation institute. (photo: jennifer stalcup) 
 mar 22, 2020 
 — atlanta, ga 
 looking to anticipate and blunt the effects of the covid-19 / coronavirus pandemic on georgia, gov. brian kemp has convened a coronavirus task force that looks at the economic, health, emergency response and preparedness, and housing implications of the deadly disease. 
 the 66-member task force is comprised of four subcommittees, including one focused on economic impact. that subcommittee includes alfie meek, economist and director of the enterprise innovation institute’s center for economic development research (cedr) at georgia tech. 
 “the role of the economic impact subcommittee is to help predict the economic effects on the state of georgia from covid19 and make recommendations,” meek said. “we‘re also being asked to brainstorm policies that might be implemented to help ease the economic pain from this event.” 
 meek has more than 25 years of experience in economic / fiscal impact analysis and community-based research. he leads the five-member cedr staff, which works with its clients — economic developers, community leaders, and industry — to help them understand the opportunities and challenges in fostering local and regional economic development. 
 meek is one of three economists selected to serve on the governor’s task force subcommittee. the others are jeffrey dorfman, the state fiscal economist who is the subcommittee chairman, and thomas cunningham the metro atlanta chamber’s chief economist. 
 the full subcommittee met for the first time on march 19 in a virtual conference call. 
 “one clear goal is to represent the many different facets of georgia’s economy that we think will be economically vulnerable at this time,” meek said. 
 in addition to dorfman, cunningham, and meek, the economic impact subcommittee members include: 
 allan adams, state director uga small business development center 
 nick ayers, managing partner afh capital 
 will bentley, georgia agribusiness council 
 donna bowman, office of the state treasurer 
 labor commissioner mark butler 
 peter carter, delta air lines chief legal officer (and chair, metro chamber) 
 bill douglas, athens first bank & trust 
 georgia state sen. frank ginn 
 walter kemmsies, economic consultant to georgia ports authority 
 steve mccoy, chief investment officer, office of the state treasurer 
 richard mcphail, chief financial officer, home depot 
 georgia house rep. clay pirkle 
 joe w. rogers, iii, waffle house 
 jessica simmons, department of revenue deputy commissioner 
 jim sprouse, executive director georgia hotel and lodging association 
 will wade, georgia student finance commission 
 additional images 
 related links 
 center for economic development research 
 kemp names coronavirus task force committees 
 contact 
 péralte c. paul 
 404.316.1210 peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu 
 email 
 peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000