gpa, georgia tech, center for innovation sign mou 
 new agreement strengthens georgia tech's relationship with ports authority. 
 georgia institute of technology president g.p. "bud" peterson speaks during the signing of a memorandum of understanding event, tuesday, july 31, 2018, at the port of savannah. the memorandum creates a new relationship aimed at supporting the state’s logistics industry in economic development, research, and education. (gpa photo / stephen b. morton) 
 jul 31, 2018 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the georgia ports authority, the georgia institute of technology, and the georgia center of innovation for logistics signed a memorandum of understanding (mou) on july 31 at the port of savannah that creates a new relationship aimed at supporting the state’s logistics industry in economic development, research, and education. 
 “for years, georgia tech has been honored to work together with the ports authority, governor nathan deal’s office, and business and government throughout the state in logistics, transportation, manufacturing, and education to strengthen our state economy and create jobs,” said georgia tech president g.p. “bud” peterson. “we are pleased to further solidify this partnership to benefit georgia’s transportation and logistics industry.” 
 the goal of the mou is to bring advanced research, evolving global logistics trends, and analysis from the world to savannah. by tapping into the hands-on expertise at gpa and the center of innovation for logistics — as well as the high-tech analysis and research at georgia tech’s supply chain and logistics institute — cargo owners and third-party logistics providers will gain superior insight into everything from when and where to build infrastructure to improved efficiency in cargo routing. 
 “georgia tech’s supply chain & logistics institute has established logistics improvement partnerships in global trade hubs such as rotterdam, singapore, shenzhen, and panama,” said gpa board chairman jimmy allgood.   “i am delighted to announce that for their first such agreement with a port authority in the western hemisphere, they have chosen an organization that is in their own state of georgia.” 
 georgia tech’s stewart school of industrial and systems engineering has been ranked no. 1 in the country for the past 28 years, and georgia tech is recognized as one of the leading research universities in the world. 
 matt markham, director of the georgia center of innovation for logistics, said the collaborative effort further strengthens the state’s position as an economic development leader. 
 “most companies that choose georgia as their home depend on its world-class logistics for their success,” markham said. “our new relationship builds on our center’s goal of providing company-specific analyses and facilitating connections between logistics providers and potential clients.” 
 the multi-modal network is designed to combine ocean, truck, rail, and air transportation to create optimal conditions for an easier and faster network. gpa executive director griff lynch said the initiative will allow the georgia ports authority to continue growing its service area across the u.s. southeast and beyond. 
 “we are excited to enter into this agreement between our organizations,” lynch said. “the mou leverages the institute’s predictive analytics and supply chain optimization, the center of innovation for logistics’ network of connections, and the gpa’s experience in the field as an industry leader.” 
 about the georia ports authority: 
 since 1945, georgia’s ports have served as magnets for international trade and investment, enriching the state’s economy to benefit all georgians. the georgia ports authority is dedicated to providing customers with the most efficient, productive port facilities in the nation, and to creating jobs and business opportunities to benefit more than 9.7 million georgians. the gpa is committed to maintaining its competitive edge through development of leading-edge technology, marketing and operations to move cargo faster. and, the authority is working hard to identify what must be done today to sustain growth, performance and security for tomorrow. 
 about the georgia institute of technology: 
 the georgia institute of technology, also known as georgia tech, is one of the nation’s leading research universities — a university that embraces change while continually creating the next. the next generation of leaders. the next breakthrough startup company. the next life-saving medical treatment. georgia tech provides a focused, technologically based education to more than 25,000 undergraduate and graduate students. georgia tech has many nationally recognized programs, all top-ranked by peers and publications alike, and is ranked in the nation’s top 10 public universities by u.s. news and world report. it offers degrees through the colleges of computing, design, engineering, sciences, the scheller college of business, and the ivan allen college of liberal arts. as a leading technological university, georgia tech has more than 100 centers focused on interdisciplinary research that consistently contribute vital research and innovation to american government, industry, and business. 
 about the center of innovation for logistics: 
 the center of innovation for logistics facilitates innovative logistics solutions that leverage georgia’s superior business climate and enhance cargo-owing companies’ competitiveness. exclusive to georgia, the center collaborates with companies that currently ship to or from georgia, as well as those looking to locate in georgia to deploy the world’s best multi-modal logistics for supply chain success. with targeted efforts to engage its unique position in state government with partnerships in the logistics industry, the center provides impactful forums for companies to network, address industry issues, and share knowledge. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 georgia ports authority 
 georgia center for innovation - logistics 
 contact 
 lance.wallace@comm.gatech.edu 
 email 
 lance.wallace@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000