grubert contributes to new report - 
 "on the path to an equitable energy transition" 
 emily grubert, assistant professor in cee, has contributed to a new report from resources for the future (rff) entitled, "on the path to an equitable energy transition." 
 portrait of emily grubert with earth, environment, and infrastructure graphics in the background. 
 apr 29, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 emily grubert , assistant professor in the georgia tech school of civil and environmental engineering, has contributed to a new report from 
 resources for the future 
 (rff) entitled, "on the path to an equitable energy transition." rff is an independent, nonprofit, non-partisan research institution in washington, dc. 
 this report, which is newly released today, serves up a “menu” of 35 policy options to help workers and communities adapt in the energy transition. in light of the biden administration’s recent pledge to cut us emissions by 50–52% of 2005 levels, this report lays out the costs and benefits of policies that can reduce emissions while promoting fairness for communities affected by the transition to clean energy. 
 rff collaborated with a team of 15 scholars from universities across the united states to analyze policy options that touch on several categories: energy infrastructure and resilience, environmental remediation, economic development, workforce, and manufacturing and innovation. each researcher identified specific proposals and drew from available evidence to assess policy design and estimate outcomes, including effects on the environment, economy, and employment. many of the proposals analyzed in this report are currently under consideration in congress, and the report’s authors have identified relevant pieces of legislation and sections of the u.s. code. 
 find the report 
 here . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 brent verrill , research communications program manager 
 email 
 brent.verrill@research.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000