gtpd accepting applications for spring citizens police academy 
 registration is now open for the spring semester session of the georgia tech police department’s (gtpd) citizens police academy. 
 mar 13, 2024 
 registration is now open for the spring semester session of the georgia tech police department’s (gtpd) citizens police academy. 
 a five-week program designed to educate and inform georgia tech students, faculty, and staff about how gtpd operates and the issues they face, the citizens police academy enrolls 20 attendees each session on a first-come, first-served basis. 
 “this was a unique experience for my cohort and gave us exposure to the inside of policing,” said 
 tammie pierce, emergency management coordinator. “i really enjoyed learning about each division within gtpd and how it functions – especially the hands-on training from the forensics session. i feel more connected to our campus officers now that i know about the work they do on a daily basis to protect the community.” 
 sessions provide overviews and firsthand experience in forensics and investigations, digital intelligence, 911 dispatching, firearm training, and more. 
 thursday, march 28: welcome and introduction to gtpd 
 tuesday, april 2: patrol division, jeanne clery act 
 thursday, april 4: use of force and judgmental simulator 
 tuesday, april 9: office of emergency management and 911 communications 
 thursday, april 11: law enforcement technology and digital intelligence 
 monday, april 15: forensics and investigations 
 wednesday, april 17: special events and k9 unit 
 friday, april 19: firearms training (off-site) 
 tuesday, april 23: community engagement 
 thursday, april 25: administration and graduation 
 all classes (except where noted above) meet from 5:30 to 7:30 p.m. at gtpd headquarters 
 on the corner of 10th street and hemphill avenue nw . 
 click 
 here 
 for more information about the program. to secure your spot, submit an application 
 here . 
 related links 
 citizens police academy 
 contact 
 gena snead 
 communications officer 
 georgia tech police department 
 email 
 outreach@police.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000