gtri wins $245m air force contract for engineering, advanced technology support 
 five-year contract will provide engineering, development and support for electronic warfare and avionics systems. 
 the u.s. air force has awarded a five-year, $245.5 million contract to the georgia tech research institute for engineering, research and development of advanced electronic warfare and avionics systems. among the aircraft included in the new contract is the f-16 fighting falcon, shown here during refueling operations over kansas. (photo courtesy: mike killian and u.s. air force) 
 jul 23, 2019 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the 
 georgia tech research institute (gtri) 
 has received a $245.5 million, five-year contract from the u.s. air force to support national defense and mature advanced technology. 
 the award, 
 announced july 9 , is renewable for an additional five years for a total potential investment of $491 million. 
 “this award affirms gtri’s growing value to our nation’s defense,” said lora weiss, interim senior vice president and director of gtri. “as the u.s. faces increasingly more sophisticated technological threats from innovative and unconventional adversaries, this contract will expand gtri’s ability to quickly apply its breadth of emerging and advanced technologies and leverage the creativity and expertise of a major university to solve critical national problems.” 
 the contract extends decades of partnership between gtri and the 
 air force’s electronic warfare & avionics (ew&a) program office , which is responsible for supporting the hundreds of software systems installed on or supporting 60 different kinds of aircraft. 
 “gtri delivers essential engineering capability across the mission of ew&a and provides a long-term, strategic relationship beyond just the ew&a program office to include other parts of the usaf,” said col. james wilson, the division’s senior materiel leader. “this contract will streamline the opportunity for the ew&a program office to leverage the capabilities of gtri across usaf.” 
 gtri has been a designated defense department university affiliated research center since 1995, capitalizing on the research institute’s expertise in electromagnetics and materials technologies, systems engineering, modeling and simulation, threat systems research, sensors and weapon system analysis, cybersecurity, and test and evaluation. 
 gtri’s 2,000-plus engineers, scientists and support staff offer technical and subject-matter expertise to identify and mature technologies, and develop operational prototypes to meet warfighter needs. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 georgia tech research institute 
 air force life cycle management center 
 contact 
 joshua stewart 
 404.894.6016 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000