gtri to host 7th national seaperch challenge underwater robotics championships 
 middle and high school students to navigate an underwater obstacle course with seaperch 
 student competitors work on their underwater remotely operated vehicle during the seaperch competition at the georgia tech mcauley aquatic center in 2015. 
 may 12, 2017 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the georgia tech research institute (gtri) will host more than 1,500 students, teachers, coaches, family and guests at the 7th national seaperch underwater robotics championships from 8:45 a.m. to 6 p.m., may 20, 2017, at the georgia institute of technology (georgia tech) mcauley aquatics center. 
 seaperch is a robotics program that equips teachers and students with the resources they need to build an underwater remotely operated vehicle (rov). more than 200 student teams will participate, including regional winners from middle and high schools as well as from 4-h, boy scouts, girl scouts, home schoolers, and other groups who have earned the right to compete against their peers on the national stage. 
 during the competition, the students will test their vehicles, navigate an obstacle course and compete in specific challenges. each team will also present their understanding of engineering principles and design concepts through an engineering notebook. 
 “at georgia tech, we’re creating the next generation of scientists and engineers to solve the world’s most difficult problems, and at georgia tech research institute, those solutions come to life for our customers,” said leigh mccook, gtri division chief and director of stem outreach programs. “it’s important for us to be involved with initiatives like seaperch because they stimulate excitement for careers in stem. we need these students at georgia tech so we can continue meet the demand for stem workers at gtri and throughout the economy.” 
 seaperch is the innovative k-12 underwater robotics program sponsored by the office of naval research and managed by the association of unmanned vehicle systems international foundation (auvsi). the competition provides students with the opportunity to learn about science, technology, engineering and mathematics (stem) concepts and careers while building an underwater rov as part of a science and engineering technology curriculum. throughout the project, student teams learn to solve problems using engineering and scientific processes such as design principles, buoyancy and displacement, propulsion, tool safety and usage, circuitry, ergonomics, depth measurement, and the physics of motion, force and light. to learn more, visit 
 www.seaperch.org / seaperch_challenge . 
 gtri’s stem initiative — stem@gtri — aims to inspire, engage and impact georgia educators and students by providing access to experts in the fields of science, technology, engineering and math. through this interaction, gtri hopes to improve academic performance in stem subjects and encourage students to pursue educational and career opportunities in these areas, as well as provide materials for teachers to strengthen their stem-related curriculum. 
 the georgia tech research institute solves complex problems through innovative and customer-focused research and education. established in 1934, gtri is georgia tech’s nonprofit, applied research arm with more than 2,000 staff, 20 locations, eight laboratories and annual contract awards exceeding $360 million. learn more at 
 www.gtri.gatech.edu . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 seaperch national challenge 
 georgia tech calendar 
 contact 
 amber.rice@gtri.gatech.edu 
 email 
 amber.rice@gtri.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000