honeywell joins georgia tech internet-of-things research center 
 honeywell becomes the 19th company to join georgia tech's internet-of-things research center 
 georgia tech's center for the development and application of internet-of-things technologies (cdait) is housed within the georgia tech research institute and located in the centergy building in tech square. 
 mar 21, 2017 
 — atlanta, ga 
 honeywell today announced that it is joining georgia tech’s center for the development and application of internet of things technologies (cdait), reinforcing its commitment to grow its atlanta presence. this follows honeywell’s announcement late last year that it would create more than 730 software engineering jobs at its new u.s. software center and establish a global headquarters for its $10.7 billion home and building technology business in midtown atlanta. 
 as a global fortune 100 technology leader in the industrial, commercial and consumer space, honeywell will bring software engineering expertise to cdait along with broader experience and exposure to the emerging and rapidly growing internet of things (iot) marketplace. 
 “honeywell is developing some of the world’s most advanced software and digital-based services and solutions to enable customers to realize the full potential of the iot,” said stephen gold, vice president and general manager of honeywell connected enterprises.  “building on over a century of industry experience, our data scientists and developers create value by connecting the physical and digital worlds to deliver better outcomes and a safer, smarter, more sustainable experience. software engineers at honeywell work on real problems that impact people’s lives every day, whether at home, at work, in a plant, in your car, or on an airplane.  we’re excited to be working with georgia tech’s cdait on new iot applications.  together, we can accomplish a lot.” 
 by joining cdait, honeywell is building on its existing collaboration with georgia tech and the rich resource that its faculty, students and research facilities represent.  honeywell is working to aggressively recruit top software engineering talent to its new atlanta-based u.s. software center.  these engineers will specialize in developing software solutions that support honeywell’s offerings, which address the emergence of iot, including mobile, cloud computing and data analytics, as well as marketing and user experience. honeywell engineers will work on critical software and digital products as part of the company’s connected technologies focus in homes, buildings, industrial plants, workers, automobiles and aircraft. 
 “we are looking forward to working closely with honeywell’s team to leverage their iot-related capabilities,” said alain louchez, managing director of cdait. “our goal is to quickly advance our relationship to respond to the growing demands and opportunities in the iot space. the proximity to the georgia tech campus of honeywell’s new atlanta home will facilitate terrific exchanges and cooperation.” 
 at cdait, honeywell looks to enhance its understanding of the many dimensions and challenges of the iot space through collaborative research and activities with its fellow board members and georgia tech faculty and students. 
 ”we are delighted to welcome honeywell to cdait’s board,” said jeff evans, chairman of the cdait board and director of the information and communications laboratory at the georgia tech research institute, which houses cdait. “the collective knowledge and talent in technological and business domains honeywell brings effectively complement the skill set and experience of our board.” 
 about honeywell 
 honeywell ( www.honeywell.com ) is a fortune 100 software-industrial company that delivers industry specific solutions that include aerospace and automotive products and services; control technologies for buildings, homes, and industry; and performance materials globally.  our technologies help everything from aircraft, cars, homes and buildings, manufacturing plants, supply chains, and workers become more connected to make our world smarter, safer, and more sustainable.  for more news and information on honeywell, please visit 
 www.honeywell.com / newsroom . 
 about cdait 
 cdait (pronounced "sedate") is a global, non-profit, partner-funded center within the georgia institute of technology (“georgia tech”) located in atlanta that fosters interdisciplinary research and education while driving general awareness about the internet of things. it aims at efficiently identifying, understanding and solving for its sponsors challenges and problems that may arise along the whole iot value chain. cdait bridges sponsors with georgia tech faculty and researchers as well as industry members with similar interests. to learn more about cdait, visit 
 www.cdait.gatech.edu . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 honeywell's announcement of new software center 
 contact 
 lance.wallace@comm.gatech.edu 
 email 
 lance.wallace@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000