honoring georgia’s manufacturing industry 
 new initiative highlights the role manufacturing plays in the state 
 the georgia manufacturing extension partnership at georgia tech (gamep) has launched faces of manufacturing to showcase the unsung heroes of georgia manufacturing and highlight the important role they and the industry play in the state. 
 nov 18, 2014 
 — atlanta, ga 
 do you know the people of georgia’s manufacturing industry? they are the 486,000 dedicated men and women across the state whose efforts and commitment to their jobs and communities contribute more than $544 million a year to georgia’s economy. and to honor those in the sector, the georgia manufacturing extension partnership at georgia tech (gamep) has launched 
 faces of manufacturing . the year-long campaign, which is accepting nominations, is designed to showcase the unsung heroes of georgia manufacturing and highlight the important role they and the industry play in the state. the first round of nominations is being accepted through dec. 22. gamep will highlight a different nominee each month in 2015 as that month’s 
 face of manufacturing .  in order to be eligible, nominees must be employed in manufacturing or have ties to the industry. those chosen as the 
 face of manufacturing 
 will be selected by a 12-member committee comprised of representatives from georgia tech, economic development groups, manufacturing companies, and related associations. “manufacturing is such a thriving component of our state’s economy, and we want to celebrate the people who help to make it what it is,” said gamep director karen j. fite. “so many georgians have rich, compelling stories of why they chose manufacturing as their career paths and how it has made a difference in their families’ lives and their communities.” the campaign is also a good way to show all of the opportunities and different career choices that exist in manufacturing, especially the high-tech and advanced areas of the industry that are driving much of georgia’s current employment demands, fite said. know someone who is a great candidate for the faces of manufacturing? please fill out our nomination form ( gamep.org / faces-of-manufacturing ) and send it to katie takacs at: 
 katie.takacs@innovate.gatech.edu 
 by dec. 22. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 faces of manufacturing nomination form 
 contact 
 katie takacs katie.takacs@innovate.gatech.edu 
 email 
 katie.takacs@innovate.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000