howell named interim vice president for information technology and chief information officer 
 leo howell, chief information security officer at georgia tech, has been named interim vice president for information technology and chief information officer. 
 dec 18, 2023 
 leo howell, chief information security officer at georgia tech, has been named interim vice president for information technology and chief information officer for the institute. this announcement comes on the heels of 
 daren hubbard’s departure 
 to princeton university. howell will begin on jan. 1, 2024. 
 leo howell has played a crucial role in guiding initiatives across the campus community aimed at crafting thorough solutions for addressing cybersecurity risks at georgia tech. 
 i am confident in his capacity to guide the team through this period of transition,” said shantay n. bolton, executive vice president for administration and finance and chief business officer. 
 howell joined georgia tech in october 2021 , reporting to hubbard as the chief information security officer. in this role, he leads the development and implementation of an institute-wide information security and risk management program. as a member of the senior leadership team in oit, he is responsible for creating and maintaining a cybersecurity program and leading the cybersecurity team, which manages the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of institute information assets and cybersecurity-related compliance. 
 “it is a privilege to step into this role for oit as part of the leadership transitional plan,” said howell. “i look forward to working with my colleagues to further support the institute’s instructional, research, and service missions.” 
 the search for the next vice president for information technology and chief information officer is in progress. 
 the national executive search firm wittkieffer will assist georgia tech in the search. more information will be shared when it is available. 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000