howell selected interim vice president for information technology and chief information officer 
 leo howell will join the president’s cabinet as the interim vice president for information technology and chief information officer for the institute. 
 jun 12, 2023 
 leo howell, 
 chief information security officer (ciso) at georgia tech, has been selected interim vice president for information technology and chief information officer 
 for the institute. this announcement comes on the heels of 
 daren hubbard’s appointment 
 to interim executive vice president for administration and finance and interim chief business officer. 
 howell will begin his new role on june 20. both hubbard and howell will serve in interim roles until the permanent position of executive vice president for administration and finance is appointed. howell will join the president’s cabinet and continue to serve in his current role as ciso. 
 “having recently accepted my interim appointment and the responsibilities that come with leading a&f’s robust portfolio, it became clear that we needed leadership at the helm of the office of information technology (oit) to help ensure business continuity,” said hubbard. “leo has been instrumental in leading efforts across the campus community to develop comprehensive solutions to georgia tech’s cybersecurity risks. i have full confidence in his ability to lead the team during this transitional period.” 
 howell joined georgia tech in october 2021 , reporting directly to hubbard as the chief information security officer. in this role, he leads the development and implementation of an institute-wide information security and risk management program. as a member of the senior leadership team in oit, he is responsible for creating and maintaining a cybersecurity program and leading the cybersecurity team, which manages the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of institute information assets and cybersecurity related compliance. 
 “it is a privilege to step into this role for oit as part of the leadership transitional plan,” said howell. “i look forward to working with my colleagues to further support the institute’s instructional, research, and service missions.” 
 the search for the next executive vice president for a&f is in progress, and more information will be shared as soon as it is available. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 rachael pocklington 
 - institute communications 
 email 
 rpocklington@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000