icecube detects high-energy neutrino emission from milky way 
 our galaxy is seen through a new lens as nsf icecube collaboration presents evidence of high-energy neutrino emission from the milky way 
 jun 29, 2023 
 georgia institute of technology physics professor and center for relativistic astrophysics member 
 ignacio taboada 
 serves as spokesperson for icecube collaboration. 
 our milky way galaxy is an awe-inspiring feature of the night sky, viewable with the naked eye as a horizon-to-horizon hazy band of stars. now, for the first time, the 
 icecube neutrino observatory 
 has produced an image of the milky way using neutrinos — tiny, ghostlike astronomical messengers. 
 in an article to be published june 30, 2023, in the journal 
 science , the 
 icecube collaboration , an international group of over 350 scientists, presents evidence of high-energy neutrino emission from the milky way. 
 the 
 detected 
 high-energy neutrinos hold energies millions to billions of times higher than those produced by the fusion reactions that power stars. 
 icecube was built and is operated with 
 national science foundation (nsf) 
 funding and additional support from the fourteen countries that host institutional members of the icecube collaboration. icecube 
 observatory 
 searches for signs of high-energy neutrinos originating from our galaxy and beyond, out to the farthest reaches of the universe. 
 a cubic-kilometer neutrino detector operating at amundsen-scott south pole station observes these high-energy neutrinos , explains 
 ignacio taboada , spokesperson for icecube and a physics professor at 
 georgia institute of technology . 
 “icecube is truly unique,” taboada says. “built deep in antarctic ice, its over 5,000 light sensors search for the flashes of blue light — cherenkov radiation produced by neutrinos in the upper atmosphere, the milky way, and deep into the cosmos.” 
 searching the southern sky 
 “what's intriguing is that, unlike the case for light of any wavelength, in neutrinos, the universe outshines the nearby sources in our own galaxy," says 
 francis halzen , a professor of physics at the 
 university of wisconsin–madison 
 and principal investigator of icecube. 
 "as is so often the case, significant breakthroughs in science are enabled by advances in technology," says 
 denise caldwell , director of 
 nsf's physics division . "the capabilities provided by the highly sensitive icecube detector, coupled with new data analysis tools, have given us an entirely new view of our galaxy — one that had only been hinted at before. as these capabilities continue to be refined, we can look forward to watching this picture emerge with ever-increasing resolution, potentially revealing hidden features of our galaxy never before seen by humanity." 
 interactions between cosmic rays — high-energy protons and heavier nuclei, also produced in our galaxy, and galactic gas and dust inevitably produce both gamma rays and neutrinos. given the observation of gamma rays from the galactic plane, the milky way was expected to be a source of high-energy neutrinos. 
 “a neutrino counterpart has now been measured, thus confirming what we know about our galaxy and cosmic ray sources,” says 
 steve sclafani , a physics ph.d. student at 
 drexel university , icecube member, and co-lead analyzer. 
 the search focused on the southern sky, where the bulk of neutrino emission from the galactic plane is expected near the center of our galaxy. however, until now, the background of muons and neutrinos produced by cosmic-ray interactions with the earth’s atmosphere posed significant challenges. 
 to overcome them, icecube collaborators at drexel university developed analyses that select for "cascade" events, or neutrino interactions in the ice that result in roughly spherical showers of light. because the deposited energy from cascade events starts within the instrumented volume, contamination of atmospheric muons and neutrinos is reduced. ultimately, the higher purity of the cascade events gave a better sensitivity to astrophysical neutrinos from the southern sky. 
 machine learning in the milky way 
 however, the final breakthrough came from the implementation of machine learning methods, developed by icecube collaborators at 
 tu dortmund university , that improve the identification of cascades produced by neutrinos as well as their direction and energy reconstruction. the observation of neutrinos from the milky way is a hallmark of the emerging critical value that machine learning provides in data analysis and event reconstruction in icecube. 
 “the improved methods allowed us to retain over an order of magnitude more neutrino events with better angular reconstruction, resulting in an analysis that is three times more sensitive than the previous search,” says icecube member, tu dortmund physics ph.d. student, and co-lead analyzer 
 mirco 
 hünnefeld . 
 the dataset used in the study included 60,000 neutrinos spanning 10 years of icecube data, 30 times as many events as the selection used in a previous analysis of the galactic plane using cascade events. these neutrinos were compared to previously published prediction maps of locations in the sky where the galaxy was expected to shine in neutrinos. 
 the maps included one made from extrapolating fermi large area telescope gamma-ray observations of the milky way and two alternative maps identified as kra-gamma by the group of theorists who produced them. 
 “this long-awaited detection of cosmic ray-interactions in the galaxy is also a wonderful example of what can be achieved when modern methods of knowledge discovery in machine learning are consistently applied.” says 
 wolfgang rhode , professor of physics at tu dortmund university, icecube member, and hünnefeld’s advisor. 
 the power of machine learning offers great future potential, bringing other observations closer within reach. 
 “the strong evidence for the milky way as a source of high-energy neutrinos has survived rigorous tests by the collaboration,” says taboada, the icecube spokesperson. “now, the next step is to identify specific sources within the galaxy.” 
 these and other questions will be addressed in planned follow-up analyses by 
 icecube. 
 “observing our own galaxy for the first time using particles instead of light is a huge step,” says 
 naoko kurahashi neilson , professor of physics at drexel university, icecube member, and sclafani’s advisor. “as neutrino astronomy evolves, we will get a new lens with which to observe the universe.” 
 about icecube neutrino observatory 
 the icecube neutrino observatory is funded and operated primarily through an award from the national science foundation to the university of wisconsin–madison. the icecube collaboration, with over 350 
 scientists in 
 58 institutions from around the world , runs an extensive scientific program that has established the foundations of neutrino astronomy. 
 icecube’s 
 research 
 efforts, 
 including 
 critical 
 contributions 
 to 
 the 
 detector 
 operation, 
 are 
 funded 
 by 
 agencies in australia, belgium, canada, denmark, germany, italy, japan, new zealand, republic of korea, sweden, switzerland, taiwan, the united kingdom, and the united states, including nsf. icecube construction was also funded with significant contributions from the national fund for scientific research (fnrs & fwo) in belgium; the federal ministry of education and research (bmbf) and the german research foundation (dfg) in germany; the knut and alice wallenberg foundation, the swedish polar research secretariat, and the swedish research council in sweden; and the wisconsin alumni research 
 fund. 
 about georgia institute of technology 
 the georgia institute of technology, or georgia tech, is one of the top public research universities in the u.s., developing leaders who advance technology and improve the human condition. the institute offers business, computing, design, engineering, liberal arts, and sciences degrees. its more than 45,000 undergraduate and graduate students, representing 50 states and more than 148 countries, study at the main campus in atlanta, at campuses in france and china, and through distance and online learning. 
 as a leading technological university, georgia tech is an engine of economic development for georgia, the southeast, and the nation, conducting more than $1 billion in research annually for government, industry, and society. 
 additional media 
 related links 
 first 'ghost particle' image of milky way galaxy captured by scientists 
 our galaxy seen through a new lens: neutrinos detected by icecube 
 icecube places constraints on neutrino emission from the brightest gamma-ray bu… 
 icecube neutrinos give us first glimpse into the inner depths of an active gala… 
 ignacio taboada elected spokesperson for icecube south pole neutrino observatory 
 contact 
 science 
 contacts: 
 francis halzen , icecube principal 
 investigator 
 vilas research professor and gregory breit distinguished professor of physics 
 wisconsin icecube particle astrophysics center, university of wisconsin–madison 
 ignacio 
 taboada , 
 icecube 
 spokesperson 
 professor of physics, georgia institute of technology 
 press contacts: 
 georgia institute of technology 
 jess hunt-ralston 
 director of communications, college of sciences 
 icecube press 
 press@icecube.wisc.edu 
 nsf media affairs 
 media@nsf.gov 
 email 
 jess@cos.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000