increased traffic expected as tech hosts aps graduation ceremonies 
 road closures will affect traffic patterns on the tech campus this week as mccamish pavilion hosts atlanta public schools’ graduation ceremonies. 
 mccamish pavilion 
 may 21, 2023 
 — atlanta, ga 
 a few weeks after georgia tech’s commencement, campus will again play host to thousands of graduates and their families from tuesday, may 23, through friday, may 26, as mccamish pavilion opens its doors for 11 atlanta public schools’ graduation ceremonies. 
 with two events on tuesday and three each day for the remainder of the week, and 3,000 to 5,000 attendees expected at each ceremony, the tech community should expect increased traffic on campus and road closures that could cause delays. 
 for the duration of the event, fowler street will be closed between fifth and 10th streets. tuesday’s closure will last from 2 to 10 p.m., and wednesday through friday from 8 a.m. to 10 p.m. expect the closures to cause congestion on 10th street throughout the week, so avoid the area or take an alternate route through campus if possible. 
 for those attending any of the ceremonies, parking is available at three locations on campus: 
 family housing (er66) 
 north deck (w23) 
 dalney (w22) 
 attendees must have a ticket to enter the event, and guests must adhere to mccamish pavilion’s clear bag policy. for additional information and a full schedule of events, 
 click here . 
 additionally, russ chandler stadium will host this week’s 
 southwestern athletic conference baseball championship tournament , starting wednesday, may 24. due to overlapping events, traffic will remain heavily congested around the area. 
 parking for the baseball tournament, which runs through friday, will be available in the klaus parking deck (e40). 
 additional images 
 contact 
 steven gagliano 
 - communications officer 
 institute communications 
 email 
 steven.gagliano@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000