increasing intellectual property awareness 
 georgia tech's office of technology licensing has recently announced a memorandum of understanding (mou) with the u.s. intellectual property alliance (usipa). 
 jul 26, 2023 
 the office of technology licensing at georgia tech has announced a new memorandum of understanding (mou) with the u.s. intellectual property alliance (usipa). the mou establishes a non-exclusive framework for collaboration in developing intellectual property (ip) outreach and education programs. 
 the collaboration is expected to have a significant impact on promoting ip awareness and education. by working together, the office of technology licensing and usipa will drive positive change in the ip ecosystem and contribute to the u.s. becoming a richer ip ecosystem for the benefit of all citizens. 
 “with georgia tech being one of the leaders in developing university ip, this mou is a natural fit,” said scott frank, usipa president. “both organizations are now positioned to collaborate for the betterment of ip with students and citizens across the u.s.” 
 under the mou, the office of technology licensing and usipa agree to jointly organize and sponsor ip activities, programs, and events. this will include providing speakers on ip, sharing information on ip opportunities and activities, and performing appropriately in anything else ip-related to achieve the goals of the collaboration. 
 “georgia tech is honored to work with usipa to create ip awareness by cultivating an enhanced ip environment for the benefit of all stakeholders and the community as a whole,” said 
 raghupathy “siva” sivakumar , 
 vice president for commercialization and chief commercialization officer 
 at georgia tech. “we are pleased to build on our work together with usipa, and we look forward to collaborating on ip solutions that will expand economic opportunity and address existential challenges.” 
 both organizations recognize the importance of protecting ip and fostering innovation. by pooling their resources, they aim to educate and engage more individuals and organizations on the benefits and value of ip, particularly in the ever-evolving digital age. 
 for media inquiries, please contact: 
 georgia tech office of technology licensing 
 lacey cameron 
 email: lcameron30@gatech.edu 
 u.s. intellectual property alliance 
 taylor york 
 email: taylor.york@readyforsocial.com 
 additional images 
 contact 
 lacey cameron 
 email 
 lcameron30@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000