interim leadership roles announced for administration and finance 
 following the news of kelly fox’s departure from georgia tech as executive vice president for administration and finance (a&f), president ángel cabrera is appointing two new interim leadership positions until a permanent replacement is selected. 
 mike shannon and jim fortner 
 aug 03, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 following the news of kelly fox’s departure from georgia tech as executive vice president for administration and finance (a&f), president ángel cabrera is appointing two new interim leadership positions until a permanent replacement is selected. 
 beginning aug. 13, mike shannon, a&f’s vice president and deputy chief business officer, will assume the role of interim executive vice president for a&f and will serve as interim chief business officer. in addition, jim fortner will remain a&f’s vice president for finance and planning and will assume the role of interim chief financial officer. 
 “i thank them both for their support, leadership, and willingness to serve in this capacity as we move forward,” said cabrera. “they are trusted and dedicated members of the institute’s senior leadership team and bring a wealth of experience to the organization.” 
 both shannon and fortner have served the institute in various leadership roles over the years and will continue to lead the transformative initiatives already underway in a&f. this includes administrative excellence and the launch of the administrative services center, the budget reform initiative, the hr transformation project, data excellence, the institute’s sustainability plan, and the campus master plan. 
 “it is my honor to help lead a&f during this transition and continue the work that brings the institute strategic plan to life,” said shannon. “i am delighted to work with president cabrera, the executive leadership team, and my colleagues in a&f to deliver on our mission to develop leaders who advance technology and improve the human condition.” 
 “i am honored to be asked to serve in this capacity for georgia tech,” said fortner. “we are fortunate in a&f to have highly committed and experienced talent, and i am certain that we will continue on our journey to create an inclusive and high-performing environment for our employees and students.” 
 provost steve mclaughlin will chair the search committee to select the next executive vice president for a&f. more information will be shared as it becomes available. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 rachael pocklington 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000