ivan allen college researcher shows many in u.s. faced economic hardship due to covid-19 
 new research has found almost 25% of people surveyed experienced some form of deprivation due to the coronavirus pandemic. 
 the coronavirus pandemic has triggered an unprecedented economic crisis in the u.s. 
 dec 16, 2020 
 — atlanta, ga 
 new research has found that almost 25% of u.s. respondents experienced two of four types of deprivation due to the coronavirus pandemic. 
 shatakshee dhongde, associate professor of economics in the ivan allen college of liberal arts, analyzed results of the federal reserve board’s survey of household economics and decision-making to determine the multiple economic deprivations experienced by respondents. her work was recently published in the open-access journal 
 plos one . dhongde found that significant proportions of u.s. respondents were experiencing economic hardships even early in the covid-19 pandemic, with hispanic citizens being particularly affected. 
 “the paper highlights the plight of americans during the early months of the economic crisis set in motion amid the coronavirus pandemic,” dhongde said. “it sheds light on how economic disparities deepened along racial and ethnic lines.” 
 the pandemic triggered an unprecedented economic crisis in the u.s. data from the centers for disease control and prevention shows more than 374,000 confirmed u.s. covid-19 cases between april 3 and april 6. the federal reserve board surveyed 1,030 u.s. respondents about their households. the survey compiled data on four indicators of economic deprivation: overall financial condition, loss of employment, reduction in income, and inability to pay bills in full. 
 dhongde found significant deprivation among respondents, with almost 25% reporting hardships in at least two of the four indicators. one quarter of respondents saw their incomes fall compared to the previous month, and 13% were unable to pay their monthly bills. young adults and those without a college education experienced a disproportionate loss of economic well-being. 
 she also found that hispanic respondents were experiencing significantly higher deprivation: over 37% of these respondents faced hardships in at least two of the four indicators, and 8% reported hardships in all four areas. 
 “going forward, it is urgent that we prioritize economic aid to vulnerable populations,” dhongde added. “these individuals are experiencing multiple hardships, and, without immediate aid, they will not be able to sustain the economic shock of the pandemic.” 
 # # # 
 about the georgia institute of technology 
 the georgia institute of technology is a top ten public research university with 40,000 students who study in person at the main campus in atlanta, at georgia tech- lorraine, at georgia tech’s shenzhen, china campus, as well as through distance and online learning. students represent 50 states and 149 countries. its engineering and computing colleges are the largest and among the highest-ranked in the nation, along with outstanding programs in business, design, liberal arts, and sciences. with more than $1 billion annually in research awards across all six colleges and the georgia tech research institute (gtri), georgia tech is among the nation’s most research-intensive universities. it is an engine of economic development for the state of georgia, the southeast and the nation. georgia tech’s mission is to develop leaders who advance technology and improve the human condition. its mission and strategic plan are focused on making a positive impact in the lives of people everywhere. for more than 135 years the people of georgia tech have dared to imagine and then create solutions for a better future. the innovative culture and leadership continue, for progress and service for all. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 research article 
 contact 
 denise ward denise.ward@gatech.edu 
 email 
 denise.ward@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000