jim hall named interim vice president for development 
 jim hall, associate vice president for development — athletics, has been named interim vice president for development, beginning jan. 1. 
 jim hall 
 dec 08, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 jim hall, associate vice president for development — athletics, has been named interim vice president for development, beginning jan. 1. 
 hall joined the georgia tech athletics association in 1998. for more than 23 years, he has served in varying leadership roles, including on leadership teams for barrett h. carson, outgoing vice president for development, as well as athletics director todd stansbury. he directs the alexander-tharpe fund, which is responsible for all development activities in support of intercollegiate athletics at georgia tech, raising more than $20 million annually. he recently led the alexander-tharpe fund staff to their three best fundraising years in the history of georgia tech athletics, as well as the three-year athletics initiative 2020, raising $175 million against a $125 million goal. he has also been a part of multiple seven-figure commitments to several schools and colleges at georgia tech. 
 “jim hall is a proven leader with a clear passion for our student-athletes and the institute as a whole,” said president ángel cabrera. “i look forward to working with him in this role and am grateful for his leadership.” 
 before joining georgia tech, hall directed all intercollegiate athletics fundraising activities at indiana state university. he was named the 2010 university division fundraiser of the year by the national association of athletic development directors. he holds a bachelor's degree from the university of california and a master's degree from the university of oklahoma. 
 hall will serve until a new vice president is named. the search, chaired by provost steven w. mclaughlin, will commence in the coming weeks. carson, who has served as vice president for development since 1997, will retire on dec. 31, but will stay on for six to 12 months as senior philanthropic advisor to president cabrera. 
 additional images 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000