join in on homecoming events for the rest of october 
 the theme this year is “buzzing into fall,” and, with that, there are events ranging from a scavenger hunt to a banner competition. 
 georgia tech mini 500 
 oct 24, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the season of homecoming is upon us. as the weather begins to cool down and the leaves start changing color, many georgia tech organizations such as the 
 student center programs council (scpc) 
 and 
 ramblin’ reck club 
 are working tirelessly to make the next two weeks unforgettable. 
 the theme this year is “buzzing into fall,” and, with that, there are events ranging from a scavenger hunt to a banner competition. for a full listing of events, you can consult this 
 guidebook . 
 however, there are a few main staples to look out for this week. 
 the first major event is the 
 homecoming carnival . 
 this will be tuesday, oct. 26, from noon to 3 p.m. on tech green. there are many reasons to come out, whether it be the fall foods of apple cider and caramel apples or the games of human foosball and axe throwing. 
 the 
 mini 500 
 has been a tradition since 1969 where students use tiny tricycles to race around peters parking deck. with four racers and a pit crew, this event is an intense competition. although the period to sign up has passed, this is a great event to watch the night before the game on friday, oct. 29, at 5:30 p.m. 
 the 
 freshman cake race , 
 wreck parade , and 
 homecoming football game 
 all take place on saturday, oct. 30. the 
 freshman cake race 
 is a century-old tradition among first years. while this began as a way to recruit for the school track team, it has since become an open race to get first-year students in the homecoming spirit. the race begins at 6:30 a.m. it is a half mile long, beginning at sixth and fowler streets. all participants get a free cupcake, and the male and female winners get a whole cake as well as halftime congratulations from mr. and ms. georgia tech. 
 the last event before the game is the 
 wreck parade , 
 which begins at 8 a.m. this event shows off three types of vehicles. classic cars are over 25 years old and retain the spirit of the wreck itself. fixed bodies are built by students and based on the homecoming theme. contraptions are completely human-powered with the homecoming theme in mind. all along fowler street, students will be able to watch the vehicles as they drive by. 
 all of these events culminate with the homecoming football game against virginia tech. the kickoff time will be announced closer to the game. 
 the 
 alumni association 
 also hosts a slate of events that share the history and traditions of georgia tech and offer opportunities for those who “come home” to connect with each other. students are welcome to also attend these spirit-focused events. 
 learn more and register for events . 
 homecoming event highlights: 
 pie up the competition 
 monday, oct. 25 
 4 p.m. 
 midtown ii, exhibition hall 
 homecoming carnival 
 tuesday, oct. 26 
 noon – 3 p.m. 
 tech green 
 foosball frenzy 
 wednesday, oct. 27 
 11 a.m. 
 midtown v, exhibition hall 
 mock rock 
 wednesday, oct. 27 
 7 p.m. 
 ferst center for the arts 
 pomp displays 
 thursday, oct. 28 
 noon – 5 p.m. 
 locations across campus 
 mini 500 
 friday, oct. 29 
 5:30 p.m. 
 peters parking deck 
 freshman cake race 
 saturday, oct. 30 
 6:30 a.m. 
 6th and fowler streets 
 wreck parade 
 saturday, oct. 30 
 8 – 9:30 a.m. 
 fowler street 
 football game 
 saturday, oct. 30 
 noon 
 bobby dodd stadium 
 additional images 
 contact 
 connor white 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000