kaye husbands fealing elected napa fellow; keynotes aaas fellowship program 
 the school of public policy chair was chosen among 51 leaders in the field of public administration to have been selected for napa's 2019 class of academy fellows. 
 kaye husbands fealing 
 sep 18, 2019 
 — atlanta, ga 
 by paul demerritt, ivan allen college communications 
 the 
 national academy of public administration 
 (napa) recently announced that georgia institute of technology 
 school of public policy 
 chair 
 kaye husbands fealing 
 was among 51 leaders in the field of public administration to be selected for the 
 2019 class of academy fellows . 
 husbands fealing and the other 2019 fellows will be inducted during napa’s annual  academy fall meeting , which will take place from november 7 to 8 in arlington, virginia. 
 “i am very pleased to welcome our 2019 class of fellows,” said academy president and ceo 
 terry gerton . “our fellows are nationally recognized for their expertise and contributions to the field of public administration and this year’s incoming class is no exception. they are an outstanding group that will enrich our fellowship, especially as we unveil the  grand challenges in public administration  and collaborate across the field to find solutions.” 
 husbands fealing recently gave the keynote address for the  american association for the advancement of science (aaas) fellowship program 
 on september 12. drawing on her experience as a aaas fellow and executive board member, she encouraged attendees to ensure that passion and courage always drive their work. 
 in addition to her napa and aaas appointments, husbands fealing has received honors and holds positions at a number of policy-focused government agencies, nonprofits, and adademic institutions. she currently serves on the 
 national science foundation’s committee on equal opportunities in science and engineering, 
 the 
 national institutes of health’s national advisory general medical sciences council , the 
 national academies panels on review of the small business innovation research and small business technology transfer programs at the department of energy , the 
 national academies panel on reengineering the census bureau’s annual economic surveys , and the 
 georgia intellectual property alliance . 
 she is a board member for the 
 center for organization research and design at arizona state university , and for the 
 society for economic measurement . at georgia tech, she also serves on the 
 institute for data engineering and science council , and the 
 intellectual property advisory board. 
 the school of public policy is a unit of georgia tech's 
 ivan allen college of liberal arts. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 rebecca keane 
 director of communications 
 rebecca.keane@iac.gatech.edu 
 404.894.1720 
 email 
 rebecca.keane@iac.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000