keep testing through fall events 
 with students back from fall break and homecoming activities coming up, asymptomatic surveillance testing is more important than ever. 
 covid-19 testing sticker - test for my boos 
 oct 13, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 with students back from fall break and homecoming activities coming up, asymptomatic surveillance testing is more important than ever. 
 homecoming at georgia tech is one of the most tradition-filled and exciting weeks of the year. with many students missing out on events last year, this year’s highly anticipated festivities will include particular attention to safety protocols, including masks and hand sanitizer being offered at indoor events. 
 events are scheduled all week long, starting with the homecoming concert on wednesday, oct. 20, and students are encouraged to test frequently as they participate in more social activities. 
 that testing can start now. students who test today, oct. 13, can pick up a free t-shirt at the community market. get your test, grab a sticker, and bring it to the jackets moving forward table on the instructional center lawn from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. buzz will be there to welcome you, too. 
 plan to test again at the end of this week, and early next week before the homecoming festivities begin. 
 covid-19 campus testing continues to be fast and free. the saliva-based test takes about two minutes and all sites are open regular hours this week. and, of course, cookies and other treats await you at test sites. 
 view site locations and hours , and start your next test at 
 mytest.gatech.edu . 
 the best ways to prevent covid-19 are still through vaccination and wearing face coverings when indoors. vaccines continue to be distributed on campus at stamps health services, and face coverings are encouraged in all campus facilities. if you have not been vaccinated, 
 learn more 
 and 
 make an appointment today . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 campus covid-19 testing 
 covid-19 vaccines at georgia tech 
 covid-19 testing and vaccine appointments 
 contact 
 kristen bailey 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000