kendra garcia, designing the future 
 industrial design graduate wants to help revolutionize industries and improve daily life. 
 dec 15, 2023 
 kendra garcia’s academic journey includes a blend of mechanical engineering, business, and fine art. that is what led the first-generation student from marietta, georgia, to earn a bachelor’s degree in 
 industrial design . 
 “i want to design the future,” she said. “ industrial design shapes the future through creativity, innovation, and problem-solving. it is where imagination meets function, turning ideas into real solutions. this major enables people to create products and experiences that revolutionize industries, improve daily life, and contribute to a brighter future.” 
 as an undergraduate, garcia worked as a research assistant for a year with stem @ gtri, a k-12 outreach program, designing content for middle and high school students as well as teachers in georgia. “i worked on collaborative projects such as direct to discovery, cyberstart america, and georgia tech’s high school internship program which reached more than 12,000 students.” 
 she also had an internship with columbia records, working in digital production and handling digital assets for the artists. she designed landing pages for artists’ websites, and created visual language and graphic design. she also designed digital campaign content for various social media outlets including spotify, instagram, and tiktok. 
 “one of my aspirations was to design for my favorite artists, including beyonc é , rosalia, miley cyrus, baby keem, tyler the creator, girl in red, rauw alejandro, and others,” she said. “this year, i had the extraordinary chance to turn my dream into reality at columbia records. it was an incredibly surreal experience, and i am immensely grateful for the opportunity and the invaluable insights i gained.” 
 garcia, who participated in create-x and female founders at georgia tech, said she will cherish the friendships she made at tech and the vibrant studio culture. 
 she plans to pursue a master’s in human computer interaction, delving deeper into ux / ui research. “i’m eager to refine my expertise and venture into opportunities within the realm of design.” 
 she will celebrate commencement with her parents, younger sister, and cousins. 
 additional media 
 related links 
 school of industrial design 
 college of design 
 contact 
 victor rogers 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000