kendeda building wins metro atlanta chamber award for cutting-edge sustainability 
 atlanta e3 awards recognize projects and organizations for developing clean technology that protects the environment and enhaces the economy. 
 oct 05, 2020 
 — atlanta, ga 
 metro atlanta’s business community has recognized 
 the kendeda building for innovative sustainable design 
 as one of the region’s most innovative projects at the intersection of sustainability and commerce. 
 the 
 atlanta e3 awards 
 honor projects, organizations, and people working to conserve metro atlanta’s natural resources and develop clean technologies to enhance the economy and environment. 
 the kendeda building won one of four 2020 awards. 
 “the kendeda building was built to inspire change, not just on georgia tech’s campus, but across the southeast building industry,” said shan arora, the building’s director. “we are honored that the region’s leaders have recognized the building for demonstrating what is possible in terms of buildings that return more to the environment and people than they take.” 
 the metro atlanta chamber selects a handful of projects each year that prove doing the right thing by the environment is not at odds with making a profit. the awards celebrate collaboration, problem-solving, and making a positive difference for the region. 
 “this year’s atlanta e3 winners represent the very best of the cutting-edge companies advancing what sustainability means for metro atlanta’s businesses and their communities,” 
 said katie kirkpatrick, president and ceo of the metro atlanta chamber. 
 “we are thrilled to showcase their impact in the region and in their respective industries.” 
 the kendeda building officially opened for classes in january. the project’s goals extend far beyond sustainability — it’s a regenerative facility that generates its own electricity and collects its own water for onsite consumption. it also diverted virtually all of its construction waste from landfills. the building is in a one-year performance period for living building challenge 3.1 certification. 
 “completing the kendeda building was just the beginning,” arora said. “now we have to apply what we’ve learned across the entire metro atlanta region so we have the highest-performing buildings in the country.” 
 other e3 award winners this year include: 
 genuine parts company 
 atlanta hawks / state farm arena 
 georgia power 
 additional images 
 related links 
 atlanta e3 awards 
 the kendeda building for innovative sustainable design 
 contact 
 joshua stewart 
 404.894.6016 
 email 
 jstewart@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000