lim, milor, qureshi elevated to ieee fellows 
 ieee fellow is a distinction reserved for select ieee members whose extraordinary accomplishments. 
 (l-r) sung kyu lim, linda milor, and  moinuddin k. qureshi. georgia tech's three faculty members elevated to fellow status in the institute of electrical and electronics engineers (ieee) for 2023. 
 jan 26, 2023 
 — atlanta, ga 
 three georgia tech faculty members have been elevated to fellow status in the institute of electrical and electronics engineers (ieee), the world’s largest technical professional organization for the advancement of technology. they are 
 sung kyu lim 
 and 
 linda milor , professors in the school of electrical and computer engineering (ece), and 
 moinuddin k. qureshi , professor in the 
 school of computer science 
 with an adjunct appointment in ece. 
 ieee fellow is a distinction reserved for select ieee members whose extraordinary accomplishments in any of the ieee fields of interest are deemed fitting of this prestigious grade elevation. fellow is the highest grade of membership and conferred by the ieee board of directors. it is recognized by the technical community as a prestigious honor and an important career achievement. 
 “it's a very special honor to be named an ieee fellow because it means your peers have recognized your contribution's significance and impact,” said professor and school chair arijit raychowdhury, who became an ieee fellow in 2022. “it’s an honor to work alongside sung kyu, linda, and moinuddin. they have demonstrated to the rest of the world that our faculty and students are involved in cutting-edge, innovative research.” 
 about this year’s georgia tech ieee fellows: 
 sung kyu lim 
 lim, who currently holds the motorola solutions foundation professor title in ece, is being recognized “for contributions to electronic design automation and tradeoff for 3-dimensional integrated circuits (ics).” he is the first georgia tech ece researcher to be recruited and serve as a darpa program manager while teaching at georgia tech, currently managing programs related to 3d ics at the microsystems technology office. 
 lim’s research focus is on architecture, design, and electronic design automation (eda) for 2.5d and 3d integrated circuits. he has published more than 400 papers on the topic and received the 2022 best paper award from the ieee transactions on electromagnetic compatibility and the ieee transactions on computer-aided design of integrated circuits and systems. 
 linda milor 
 milor is being recognized “for contributions to testing of analog circuits and bridging the design-manufacturing gap for integrated circuits (ics).” her research on yield and test of semiconductor ics has been published in over 200 publications, nine papers have over 50 citations in google scholar, and eight papers have received “best paper” awards, including a best paper for the ieee transactions on semiconductor manufacturing. 
 prior to her career in academia, milor served as vice president of process technology and product engineering at esilicon corporation and as a product engineering manager at amd. she is a frequent speaker at conferences, including keynote addresses and presentations on women in stem in industry and academia. 
 moinuddin k. qureshi 
 qureshi is being recognized “for contributions to scalable memory systems.” his research interests include computer architecture, hardware security, and quantum computing. prior to joining georgia tech, he was a research scientist at the ibm t. j. watson research center where he developed the caching algorithms for power 7 systems. 
 he is a hall-of-fame member of the three major computer architecture conferences: the international symposium on computer architecture (isca), the international symposium on microarchitecture (micro), and the international symposium on high-performance computer architecture (hpca). he recently received the maurice wilkes award for contributions to high-performance memory systems from the association for computing machinery special interest group on computer architecture (sigarch). 
 the total number of fellows selected by ieee in any one year cannot exceed one-tenth of one percent of the total voting ieee membership. a complete list of the class of 2023 fellows is available on the  ieee site . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 ieee fellow program 
 sung kyu lim 
 moinuddin k. qureshi 
 linda milor 
 contact 
 dan watson dwatson@ece.gatech.edu 
 email 
 dwatson@ece.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000