maintaining mental health at the midpoint of the semester 
 between schoolwork, extracurriculars, and the ongoing pandemic, students may be feeling additional levels of stress around this point in the semester. anyone struggling with their mental health is encouraged to take advantage of the on- and off-campus res 
 mar 16, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 between schoolwork, extracurriculars, and the ongoing pandemic, students may be feeling additional levels of stress around this point in the semester. anyone struggling with their mental health is encouraged to take advantage of the on- and off-campus resources available to them. 
 health initiatives has published a list of their 
 top 10 tips 
 for mental health self-care. their 
 well-being connect 
 page also allows people to search for information, resources, and events by topic. visit the health and well-being 
 homepage 
 for a list of upcoming events relating to health initiatives, the counseling center, and stamps health services. 
 the counseling center is also hosting biweekly let’s talk sessions, which consist of informal, confidential, one-on-one consultations with georgia tech counselors. hours are from 4 to 5 p.m. on mondays and 11 a.m. to noon on thursdays and will run through the end of april. learn more about how to sign up 
 here . 
 the lgbtqia resource center will continue to hold 
 virtual events 
 throughout the summer, including coffeehouses and 
 q chats , a student discussion group series. the 
 women’s resource center 
 will also continue to hold virtual, by-appointment meetings with staff members, as well as operate voice, which provides confidential services to those affected by sexual harassment, sexual assault, intimate partner violence, and stalking. 
 the student government association (sga) released a 
 comprehensive resource guide 
 on black community support. the guide and associated article also highlighted several on- and off-campus 
 mental health resources . 
 employees can take advantage of the 
 employee assistance program (eap) , which includes 24-hour, toll-free access to licensed clinical professionals. the program is available to all healthcare benefits-eligible employees and their families. 
 several events in the coming weeks will also focus on mental health. march 16 and 24 are designated wellness days, where students and instructors can take a break from classes and assignments. departments and organizations across campus have events planned throughout the day ranging from virtual painting parties to in-person goat yoga. view the full schedule of events and learn how to register for each one 
 here . the mental health student coalition is also hosting gt cares 4u on wednesday, march 31, at 6 p.m. the in-person event will consist of students sharing their mental health journeys, including the resources they used to get help. learn more and register 
 here . 
 campus mental health resources 
 center for assessment, referral, and education (care) 
 tech ends suicide together 
 counseling center 
 collegiate recovery program 
 stamps psychiatry 
 vice president and dean of students office and student referral form 
 phone numbers 
 georgia tech care: 404.894.3498 
 georgia tech counseling center: 404.894.2575 
 georgia tech police department: 404.894.2500 
 georgia crisis and access line: 1.800.715.4225 
 national suicide prevention lifeline: 1.800.273.talk (8255) 
 national hopeline network: 1-800.784.2433 
 external resources 
 halfofus.com 
 jedfoundation.org 
 thetrevorproject.org 
 socalsunrisemh.com / social-media-and-mental-health 
 additional images 
 related links 
 well-being day events 
 making new friends, seeing old ones during covid-19 
 contact 
 grace wyner 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000