mantech partners with georgia institute of technology’s atdc to drive innovative cyber security and emerging technologies for government 
 mantech to support development of cyber technology entrepreneurs and startups 
 joe cubba is mantech's executive vice president and chief growth officer. 
 sep 28, 2023 
 the announcement marks atdc’s first such agreement with a federal systems integrator. leveraging mantech’s deep government experience, the partnership will help entrepreneurs in atdc’s cyber and emerging technologies program develop innovative, disruptive solutions that target and resolve federal agencies’ most pressing and difficult challenges. 
 mantech provides advanced, mission-focused technology solutions and services for every branch of the federal government including the department of defense, intelligence community, and federal civilian agencies. 
 “mantech is proud to work with atdc in an industry-leading initiative that will accelerate government access to highly differentiated cyber and emerging tech solutions with the potential to stop even the most insidious cyberattacks on contact,” said joe cubba, mantech executive vice president and chief growth officer. “together, we are turning today’s next-gen innovators into the technology thought leaders and giants of the future.” 
 atdc, the state of georgia’s technology incubator, works with entrepreneurs to build, scale, and launch successful technology companies. since its founding in 1980, atdc has provided coaching, curriculum, community, connections, and access to capital and customers. among the many benefits for young technology ventures, this partnership builds on atdc’s platform with training and mentoring on how startups can grow their business with funding by the government’s small business innovation research program. 
 “ small companies need a proven systems integrator like mantech to drive government introductions, integrate and deploy their technology, and show how it can make a real difference in supporting the mission,” said corbett gilliam, atdc’s 
 manager of corporate development. 
 “mantech and atdc are bringing today and tomorrow’s edisons and teslas deep inside the very operations that keep this nation safe.” 
 as part of the partnership, atdc has hired 
 blair tighe 
 to lead the vertical. in that role, tighe, a u.s. army veteran with a combined background of private sector cyber strategy and emerging technologies, will manage the pipeline, evaluate technologies, and coach companies. 
 he will leverage atdc’s connect program and expertise to secure opportunities for pilot projects, investments, and customers. he also will work with mantech to mentor companies and host classes and educational programming built around the specific needs of the cyber and emerging tech sector. 
 the cyber focus comes as atdc is seeing increased startup activity from entrepreneurs and founders in the cybersecurity space. the portfolio already has 12 companies in its incubator program. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 péralte c. paul 
 404.316.1210 
 peralte@gatech.edu 
 email 
 peralte@gatech.edu 
 additional information 
 about mantech 
 mantech provides mission-focused technology solutions and services for u.s. defense, intelligence, and federal civilian agencies. in business more than 54 years, we excel in full-spectrum cyber operations, data collection and analytics, enterprise it, agile devops systems engineering, and software application development solutions that support national and homeland security. additional information about mantech can be found at 
 mantech.com . 
 about georgia tech 
 the  georgia institute of technology,  or  georgia tech,  is one of the top public research universities in the u.s., developing leaders who advance technology and improve the human condition. the institute offers  business, computing, design, engineering, liberal arts, and sciences  degrees. its more than 45,000 undergraduate and graduate students, representing 50 states and more than 148 countries, study at the main campus in atlanta, at campuses in france and china, and through distance and online learning. as a leading technological university, georgia tech is an engine of economic development for georgia, the southeast, and the nation, conducting more than $1.0 billion in research annually for government, industry, and society. 
 about the advanced technology development center (atdc) 
 the advanced technology development center (atdc), a program of the georgia institute of technology, is the state of georgia’s technology startup incubator. founded in 1980 by the georgia general assembly, which funds it each year, atdc’s mission is to work with entrepreneurs in georgia to help them learn, launch, scale, and succeed in the creation of viable, disruptive technology companies. since its founding, atdc, a program of georgia tech's enterprise innovation institute, has grown to become the longest running and one of the most successful university-affiliated incubators in the united states, with its graduate startup companies raising $3 billion in investment financing and generating more than $12 billion in revenue in the state of georgia. to learn more, visit  atdc.org . 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000