mike shannon to join administration and finance 
 mike shannon to join administration and finance beginning feb. 8. 
 jan 29, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 michael “mike” shannon, a principal research engineer in the georgia tech research institute’s (gtri) advanced concepts laboratory, has accepted a new role at georgia tech as deputy chief business officer for administration and finance (a&f) reporting directly to executive vice president kelly fox. he will begin his new role on feb. 8. 
 “i am delighted to welcome mike to our leadership team,” fox said. “he brings a wealth of experience in leading and implementing operational strategies designed to solve pressing matters. mike will be able to contribute greatly to a&f as we work to define our future.” 
 most recently, shannon led the development and rollout of georgia tech’s covid-19 surveillance testing program, which has conducted nearly 200,000 tests since august. additionally, shannon was selected by institute leadership to lead the implementation of the georgia tech clia testing laboratory, which was a requirement to process these surveillance tests onsite. the effort included establishing the team, process, facility, information systems, and required governance and compliance protocols. 
 in this newly created position, shannon will serve as an advisor and counselor to the executive vice president and the a&f leadership team. he will oversee operational coordination of strategic initiatives including implementing the a&f strategic plan; fostering a culture of diversity, equity, and inclusion; and overseeing a&f polices to ensure clarity, relevance, and effectiveness. 
 “i am honored to take on this newly created role within the institute leadership team,” shannon said. “i have had the privilege of leading people and teams throughout my career in government, industry, and academia. i look forward to helping a&f implement the institute’s strategic plan and deliver on its proud mission of developing leaders who advance technology and improve the human condition." 
 shannon joined georgia tech in 2016 and holds an adjunct appointment in the woodruff school of mechanical engineering. a two-time tech alumnus, shannon earned a master of science in health physics in 2003 and a ph.d. in nuclear and radiological engineering in 2009. he is a retired u.s. army officer and has held numerous operational and leadership positions within the department of defense, including service as an instructor and assistant professor at the united states military academy, west point, new york. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 rachael pocklington 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000