national science foundation awards starmobile $500k funding grant 
 the nsf small business innovation research / small business technology transfer (sbir / sttr) program seeks to transform scientific discovery into societal and economic benefit by catalyzing private sector commercialization of technological innovations. 
 adjunct assoociate professor, ece 
 feb 23, 2016 
 — atlanta, ga 
 starmobile, a leading codeless, cloud-based solution centered on faster, simpler, and lower-cost delivery of enterprise mobility, has been awarded a $500,000 phase iib small business innovation research (sbir) grant from the national science foundation (nsf). the startup, which is incubating in georgia tech’s advanced technology development center’s (atdc) signature program, said it will continue its work toward enabling rapid mobilization of enterprise applications. atdc works with entrepreneurs looking to build successful technologies in georgia. starmobile also is a graduate of tech’s venturelab startup incubator, ranked no. 2 in north america. venturelab, a sister incubation program to atdc in tech’s enterprise innovation institute (ei2), works with georgia tech faculty, students, and staff to help them validate and commercialize their research and ideas into viable companies. raghupathy sivakumar, starmobile’s co-founder and chief technology officer, is a telecommunications, computer systems, and software professor at georgia tech and the wayne j. holman chair in tech’s school of electrical and computer engineering. “this phase iib sbir award is a significant milestone for us, as the rigorous nsf selection process for phase ii proposals results in only 15 percent of phase i grants receiving phase ii awards, and even fewer receiving phase iib awards,” said sivakumar in a statement. “this award is an important validation that starmobile has created a rapid mobile application development (rmad) platform that transforms how enterprises mobilize their systems. this award provides support for further development of our core technology and will help us accelerate our go-to-market plans.” the award is based on progress in product, market, and business model validation under a $750,000 nsf sbir phase ii grant awarded to starmobile in 2013, and research conducted under a $150,000 nsf sbir phase i grant awarded to starmobile in 2012. starmobile has now received a total of $1.4 million in grant awards from the nsf sbir program as part of their efforts to foster innovative technologies. the nsf small business innovation research / small business technology transfer (sbir / sttr) program seeks to transform scientific discovery into societal and economic benefit by catalyzing private sector commercialization of technological innovations. the program increases the incentive and opportunity for startups and small businesses to undertake cutting-edge, high-quality scientific research and development. nsf sbir / sttr grants not only address research and development funding, they also give recipients training in key business areas. grant awardees also receive mentorship from program directors who have extensive industry experience. the nsf sbir / sttr program awards funds in every area of science and engineering. 
 additional images 
 email 
 peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000