navicent health announces collaboration with the georgia institute of technology 
 navicent health and the advanced technology development center to promote development of health technologies and startups in central and south georgia. 
 the navicent health center for disruption && innovation (cfdi) team. 
 oct 29, 2018 
 — macon, ga 
 navicent health’s center for disruption & innovation (cfdi) is pleased to announce a new collaboration with georgia tech’s advanced technology development center (atdc) and its health technology (healthtech) program. the effort will improve the health and lives of patients in central and south georgia through the development of new technologies, treatments, and care created by healthcare technology-oriented companies based in the state. 
 atdc, the state of georgia’s technology incubator, launched its healthtech program in july 2018. at present, atdc has more than 40 startups in its healthtech portfolio, each focused on innovative solutions across a broad number of sectors including population health, caregiver support, patient billing, precision medicine, genomics, medical devices, diagnostics, data analytics, and process improvements in drug research. cfdi will work with atdc to facilitate access to a clinical community for startups that are transforming healthcare. 
 “navicent health is committed to innovation and creating a wide range of solutions, including high-performing health technologies, to improve patient care not only in central and south georgia, but industry-wide,” said christopher m. cornue, chief strategy officer and chief innovation officer for navicent health. “working with atdc, we enhance our ability to deliver innovative, consumer-focused health services through technology to improve patient satisfaction, healthcare outcomes and therefore be better able to create healthier communities.” 
 through this collaboration navicent health will serve as atdc’s healthcare facility partner and provide resources for startups in the atdc healthtech portfolio. navicent and atdc seek positive economic impact in central georgia. additionally, they want to contribute to the state economy by supporting the growth and development new startups, with a broader goal of assisting and promoting the acceleration of healthcare startups across the southeast. 
 “this is an exciting opportunity for us to work with a premier health organization to drive innovation and commercialization of healthcare technologies that will not only help entrepreneurs in georgia, but help healthcare systems across the united states in their drive to deliver superior and cost-effective patient care, cut waste, increase access, and improve outcomes,” said kirk barnes, atdc’s healthtech catalyst and who leads this initiative. “we’re looking forward to seeing the successes this relationship with navicent health will yield.” 
 founded in 2015, cfdi has become a proven and valuable testing ground for novel clinical approaches to elevate community health while leveraging disruptive technologies designed to engage consumers in meaningful ways. specifically, atdc startups selected to collaborate with cfdi will receive: 
 a standard curriculum for conducting “proof of concept” studies along with support tools to understand how to engage future health systems 
 direct clinical exposure to discover how customers will engage with their product 
 the co-development and joint commercialization of new products that may be introduced to the market with a well-established health system partner. 
 those wishing to partner with the center for disruption & innovation may contact navicent health. 
 about navicent health 
 navicent health was incorporated on nov. 17, 1994, as a nonprofit corporation whose primary purpose is to coordinate the medical center, navicent health and other affiliated entities in their mission of providing a comprehensive continuum of high quality, reasonably priced healthcare services to the region. navicent health has 970 beds for medical, surgical, rehabilitation and hospice purposes. the health system includes the medical center, navicent health, a nationally recognized tertiary teaching hospital; beverly knight olson children’s hospital, navicent health, the region’s only dedicated pediatric hospital; navicent health baldwin and medical center of peach county, navicent health, both rural hospitals; rehabilitation hospital, navicent health, the region’s oldest and most experienced rehabilitation provider; pine pointe, navicent health, which provides palliative and hospice care in homes and in its facility; carlyle place, navicent health, the area’s first continuing care retirement community;  navicent health foundation, the philanthropic arm of navicent health; as well as diagnostic and home care services. for more information, please visit  www.navicenthealth.org . 
 about georgia tech 
 the georgia institute of technology is one of the world’s premier research universities. georgia tech is a national and international leader in scientific and technological research and education and is the nation’s leading producer of engineers as well as a leading producer of female and minority engineering ph.d. graduates. ranked among the top public universities by u.s. news & world report, the institute enrolls more than 25,000 undergraduate and graduate students in fields ranging from engineering, computing, and sciences, to business, design, and liberal arts. for additional information, visit  gatech.edu . 
 about the advanced technology development center (atdc) 
 the advanced technology development center (atdc), a program of the georgia institute of technology, is the state of georgia’s technology startup incubator. founded in 1980 by the georgia general assembly which funds it each year, atdc’s mission is to work with entrepreneurs in georgia to help them learn, launch, scale, and succeed in the creation of viable, disruptive technology companies. since its founding, atdc has grown to become one of the longest running and most successful university-affiliated incubators in the united states, with its graduate startup companies raising $3 billion in investment financing and generating more than $12 billion in revenue in the state of georgia. to learn more, visit  atdc.org . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 péralte c. paul 
 peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu 
 404.894.8727 
 email 
 peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000