new faculty fellows to advise on sustainability 
 twelve faculty members have been selected to the inaugural class of fellows with the brook byers institute for sustainable systems. 
 jul 20, 2015 
 — atlanta, ga 
 a new group of georgia tech faculty has been tapped to serve as strategic advisors for the direction of sustainability research at georgia tech. twelve faculty members have been selected to the inaugural class of fellows with the brook byers institute for sustainable systems (bbiss). the new group will serve as advisors to bbiss and work to foster the culture and community of sustainability researchers, educators, and students at georgia tech. they will also help carry the message of sustainability and the vision, mission, values, and objectives of bbiss. their selection is for three years with the potential for renewal.  in late august, the fellows will begin mapping out a strategy for future years. the 12 fellows represent all six of georgia tech’s colleges, as well as the georgia tech research institute.  the inaugural bbiss fellows are: baabak ashuri , school of building construction, college of architecture. atalay atasu , scheller college of business. kevin caravati , georgia tech research institute. kim cobb , school of earth and atmospheric sciences, college of sciences. bistra dilkina , school of computational science and engineering, college of computing. ellen dunham-jones , college of architecture. tom fuller , school of chemical and biomolecular engineering, college of engineering. ashok goel , school of interactive computing, college of computing. randy guensler , school of civil and environmental engineering, college of engineering. daniel matisoff , school of public policy, ivan allen college of liberal arts. juan moreno-cruz , school of economics, ivan allen college of liberal arts. marc weissburg , school of biology, college of sciences. the program and research institute are named for brook byers, a venture capitalist and senior partner at kleiner perkins caufield & byers, who earned his bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering from georgia tech in 1968 and later an mba from stanford university. byers has helped build more than 110 companies in the life sciences area and is particularly active in biotechnology incubation. 
 related links 
 brook byers institute for sustainable systems 
 contact 
 brent verrill brook byers institute for sustainable systems 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000