new minors and courses are forthcoming 
 the academic faculty senate reviewed committee work from recent months. 
 tech tower 
 feb 24, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 at its feb. 23 meeting, the academic faculty senate reviewed committee work from recent months. 
 president ángel cabrera called the meeting to order and made comments encouraging the campus community to continue asymptomatic surveillance testing for covid-19 and to get the vaccine as soon as they are eligible. he said plans are being made for fall semester under the assumption that campus operations will be back to normal as long as things continue to progress as they have been and there are not any new health orders issued. and he reported that the georgia general assembly and the governor had restored some of the funds that were previously cut in anticipation of a budget shortage due to covid-19. minutes from the oct. 20 meeting were approved. 
 david sholl, professor in the school of chemical and biomolecular engineering, presented a request from school chairs to honor and encourage georgia tech’s women students in the lyrics of “the ramblin’ wreck” by changing the wording of the second stanza. 
 the faculty senate discussed the proposed change and concluded the issue needs to be reviewed more broadly. rhett mayor, professor in the george w. woodruff school of mechanical engineering and secretary of the faculty, will work with the senate to draft language for the april meeting formally requesting a review. 
 melanie clark, statutes committee chair, reported that the committee approved a change to the faculty handbook to include the unit or unit head in determining the duties, responsibilities, and appointments of each professor of the practice. 
 minutes of the standing committees were approved. 
 steven w. mclaughlin, provost and executive vice president for academic affairs, said nisha botchwey and steven girardot are leading the planning for summer semester, and paul cohn and michelle rinehart are leading the planning for fall semester. 
 professor karen head, school of literature, media, and communication, presented an update from the institute graduate curriculum committee. action items approved included: a posthumous degree request, doctor of philosophy with a major in computer science, several new courses and a few program modifications. 
 professor brian hammer, school of biological sciences, presented an update from the institute undergraduate curriculum committee. action items approved included: a minor in african studies and a minor in latin america and latinx studies, and updates to courses in the international plan. 
 for full presentations and meeting agenda, visit facultygovernance.gatech.edu 
 additional images 
 related links 
 faculty governance 
 contact 
 victor rogers 
 institute communications 
 email 
 victor.rogers@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000