new student move-in brings excitement and traffic to campus 
 the campus community should look out for impacts to traffic and additional congestion on friday, aug. 12. through friday, aug. 19. 
 aug 08, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 beginning this friday, more than 4,000 new first-year, transfer, and graduate yellow jackets will move into georgia tech’s residence halls. almost 4,300 upper-class and graduate residents will move in throughout the week that follows. 
 the move-in process on friday, august 12 and saturday, august 13 is expected to include impacts to traffic patterns and additional congestion. here’s what those on campus those days need to know: 
 residents moving in will enter campus heading westbound on north avenue and turn right on tech parkway to get to the back of the crc parking deck for check-in. there will be additional congestion on these routes, expect delays. 
 after check-in, residents will turn left onto ferst drive from the crc parking deck and take either a left onto 6th street for west campus or stay straight on ferst drive, turning right onto techwood drive for east campus and north avenue apartments. ferst drive will remain open to through traffic. please use caution as gtpd officers and volunteers will be on-site directing traffic. 
 expect additional delays and congestion throughout west campus, on techwood drive and centennial olympic park drive for east campus and north avenue move-in, and along 10th street for graduate housing. 
 additionally, drivers should abide by all parking notices and posted no parking signage as these areas are needed for resident check-in, unloading, and long-term parking. this includes: 
 w10-crc deck alternative parking: w02-student center deck. 
 er54-north ave south deck: please park on levels 2 and 3 only. 
 wr29 on-street parking alternative: wr30-curran deck or w31-ipst lot. 
 er51 on-street parking alternative: e52-peters deck. 
 for more information about move-in, visit the 
 new student move-in page . welcome home, jackets! 
 additional images 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000