newly named founding chair recognizes 'cybersecurity revolves around problems, not academic disciplines' 
 michael bailey has been named as the founding chair of georgia tech's school of cybersecurity and privacy. 
 photo portrait of michael bailey, founding school chair of georgia tech's cybersecurity and privacy chair 
 feb 01, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the college of computing at the georgia institute of technology is proud to announce it has selected 
 michael 
 bailey 
 as the founding chair of its school of cybersecurity and privacy. 
 bailey comes to tech from the university of illinois at urbana-champaign, where he is a professor in the department of electrical and computer engineering. 
 “i am enthusiastic about my new role as the founding chair of the 
 school of cybersecurity and privacy ,” bailey said. “the students, staff, and faculty of georgia tech have a sterling record of achievement. i look forward to working with them to create a deeply satisfying future for the department — one in which our use-inspired, multidisciplinary view of cybersecurity and privacy is a positive force for change.” 
 prior to illinois, bailey was a research associate professor in the computer science and engineering department at the university of michigan. he has also worked at amoco corporation, andersen consulting, and three startups, including a stint as the director of engineering at arbor networks. 
 at arbor, bailey managed a team of more than 30 engineers whose software protected 70 percent of the entire internet’s transit traffic against distributed-denial-of-service (ddos) attacks. he is a senior member of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers (ieee) and the association for computing machinery (acm). 
 “michael is an experienced manager who is a veteran of higher education and in industry,” said 
 charles 
 isbell , dean and john p. imlay chair of the college of computing. “he understands that cybersecurity revolves around problems, not academic disciplines, which is crucially important for this inter-college school. i am pleased to welcome him to his new role at tech.” 
 the school of cybersecurity and privacy brings together 40 faculty members from the 
 college of computing , the 
 college of engineering , the 
 ivan allen college of liberal arts , the 
 scheller college of business , and the 
 georgia tech research institute . the school was founded in 2020, with 
 richard 
 demillo 
 serving as interim until the hire of bailey as its first and founding chair. 
 “congratulations to michael on being named chair of one of our newest schools at georgia tech,” said 
 kaye 
 husbands 
 fealing , dean and ivan allen, jr. chair of the ivan allen college of liberal arts. “it is increasingly important that we continue to collaborate across disciplines to thoroughly capture all aspects of cybersecurity, including our strengths in public policy and governance. our ivan allen college faculty are looking forward to collaborating with members of scp.” 
 “as an international leader in engineering, computing, and public policy, georgia tech researchers stand at the intersection of cybersecurity and privacy,” said 
 raheem 
 beyah , dean of the college of engineering and southern company chair. “michael’s leadership skills and research background will elevate our faculty as they continue to define the future of the field. the college of engineering and i look forward to collaborating with michael upon his arrival at georgia tech.” 
 nationally ranked, innovative, interdisciplinary, and definitive, scp draws skilled cybersecurity professionals from technology, policy, business, and practical fields to meet a rising national and international demand. housed within the nationally ranked college of computing, this new school builds on georgia tech’s 20-year investment to further develop the research and education of cybersecurity and privacy. 
 georgia tech has been 
 ranked # 2 in undergraduate cybersecurity education 
 by 
 u.s. news & world report. 
 the institute receives more than $180 million in annual cybersecurity research awards and has 200,000 square feet of classified research space. there are more than 1,300 master’s students and 70 ph.d. students studying cybersecurity and privacy at georgia tech. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 ann claycombe, director of communications claycombe@cc.gatech.edu 
 email 
 claycombe@cc.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000