next cohort of emerging leaders program selected 
 the eighth cohort of georgia tech’s emerging leaders program has been selected. 
 nov 28, 2023 
 the eighth cohort of georgia tech’s emerging leaders program has been selected. starting in december 2023 and continuing through spring 2024, participants will take part in several leadership development activities, including a kick-off retreat, regular workshops and small group work during the spring, and leadership coaching. this is the first year the program has been open to senior and principal non-tenure track faculty and research faculty. 
 “on behalf of institute leadership, we are proud to welcome the next cohort of the emerging leaders program and to have opened the program to a broader representation of individuals looking to further their leadership aspirations,” said steven w. mclaughlin, provost and executive vice president for academic affairs. “this intensive program is an excellent professional investment for these academic and research faculty and we applaud their commitment to their careers and to the institute.” 
 the eighth cohort includes the following faculty members: 
 college of computing 
 betsy disalvo , associate professor, school of interactive computing 
 college of design 
 maureen linden ,   executive director, center for inclusive design and innovation 
 tarek rakha ,   associate professor, school of architecture 
 college of engineering 
 aaron young , associate professor, george w. woodruff school of mechanical engineering 
 john a. christian , associate professor, daniel guggenheim school of aerospace engineering 
 omer inan , professor, school of electrical and computer engineering 
 santiago grijalva , professor, school of electrical and computer engineering 
 sheng dai , associate professor, school of civic and environmental engineering 
 amit jariwala , director of design and innovation, george w. woodruff school of mechanical engineering 
 dima nazzal , director of professional practice, h. milton stewart school of industrial and systems engineering 
 college of sciences 
 john wise , professor, school of physics 
 pamela peralta-yahya , associate professor, school of chemistry and biochemistry 
 ivan allen college of liberal arts 
 allen hyde , associate professor, school of history and sociology 
 office of undergraduate education 
 amy d’unger , interim director and associate director, honors program 
 georgia tech research institute 
 dana forsthoefel fitzgerald , principal research engineer, sensors and electromagnetic applications laboratory 
 institute for people and technology 
 clint zeagler , principal research scientist 
 the emerging leaders program started in 2016 and is a collaboration between the office of the provost, the office of the executive vice president for research, the institute for leadership and social impact, and the office of the vice provost for faculty. 
 related links 
 learn more about the emerging leaders program 
 contact 
 amber slyter, institute for leadership and social impact 
 email 
 amber.slyter@ilsi.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000