ocean optimism 
 a four-day summit that will begin laying the foundation for establishing a united community of researchers focused on preserving a global resource 
 mar 29, 2019 
 — atlanta, ga 
 georgia tech will play host to many of the leading minds in ocean science and technology this week during a four-day summit that will begin laying the foundation for establishing a united community of researchers focused on preserving a global resource. the summit will be 
 streamed live 
 via the web. 
 oceanvisions2019: climate  is the first public-facing forum for ocean visions, an initiative 
 announced last year 
 with the stated intention of using advances in science and engineering to maintain healthy oceans for all inhabitants of earth and for all users and uses of the open seas. today, ocean visions announced the formation of a consortium: four regional hubs that will foster, review, and evaluate research and development in pursuit of healthy oceans. 
 “ocean visions provides much-needed optimism for the future of our oceans,” said emanuele di lorenzo, professor in tech’s school of earth and atmospheric sciences and director of the 
 ocean science and engineering 
 program. “it establishes a playground for innovative solutions by bringing together the leading minds in ocean conservation who are dedicated to sharing experiences as well as brainstorming and supporting better solutions.” 
 in addition to tech, founding partners include the smithsonian institution, stanford university, the scripps institution of oceanography at the university of california san diego, skidaway institute of oceanography, the university of georgia, monterey bay aquarium research institute, the georgia aquarium, monterey bay aquarium, and the birch aquarium at scripps. 
 summit participants will hear from 
 researchers, conservationists, and entrepreneurs 
 on ocean-based science and engineering successes in the areas of resilience, adaptation, mitigation, and sustainability. business leaders will learn more about proposed solutions, ranging from advanced concepts to those that are market ready. 
 georgia tech president emeritus g. wayne clough will open the summit and introduce the consortium. 
 “addressing the challenges facing our oceans will take an ambitious effort that brings together the best talent in our nation,” said clough, who served as secretary of the smithsonian institution from 2008-14. “ocean visions is unique because it is led by trusted institutions and top scientists and researchers in ocean conservation working together to formulate a call to action to foster, support, and advance innovative and viable solutions that can make a difference.” 
 additional images 
 related links 
 ocean visions 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000