october events celebrate campus sustainability month 
 events throughout the month of october offer a glimpse into the wide-ranging commitment to sustainability at georgia tech. 
 sep 28, 2023 
 october is 
 campus sustainability month , an international celebration of sustainability on college and university campuses. georgia tech will host sustainability-focused events all month. with the recent release of the institute’s 
 sustainability next plan , these campus opportunities underscore our commitment to the objectives outlined in the plan. there are numerous options centered on climate and social sustainability topics in addition to trips to explore nature around atlanta. the programming is hosted by diverse campus groups and offers a glimpse into the wide-ranging commitment to sustainability at tech. 
 event lineup 
 climate action plan student engagement workshop 
 monday, oct. 2 
 5 – 6 p.m. 
 the kendeda building for innovative sustainable design, room 210 
 as a deliverable of the sustainability next plan, the georgia tech climate action plan is a roadmap for integrating climate action strategies across operations, research, and education focusing on climate justice and reducing emissions. students are invited to join the office of sustainability for an interactive, in-person event to learn about the climate action strategies in the plan, share input, and enjoy free pizza. 
 for registration and additional information, click 
 here . rsvp required. 
 climate action plan campus town hall (virtual) 
 wednesday, oct. 4 
 11 a.m. – noon 
 virtual via zoom (rsvp required) 
 the entire georgia tech community can learn more about the georgia tech climate action plan and share input during a virtual campus town hall hosted by the office of sustainability. 
 for registration and additional information, click 
 here . 
 approaching the limits of climate viability: urban heat vulnerability in atlanta and how to adapt 
 wednesday, oct. 4 
 noon – 1:30 p.m. 
 scholar’s event theater, first floor, price gilbert library 
 as part of georgia tech library’s initiative to highlight research that makes data accessible and meaningful to the public, brian stone jr., a professor in the school of city and regional planning, will present a lecture on the urban heat island effect and its context for atlanta. 
 find more details and registration information 
 here . 
 brook byers institute for sustainable systems seminar series, baabak ashuri — valuation of investment in sustainable buildings and renewable energy infrastructure 
 thursday, oct. 5 
 3 – 4 p.m. 
 hybrid event: bbiss offices, 760 spring st., suite 118, and on 
 teams 
 baabak ashuri, a professor in the school of building construction and the school of civil and environmental engineering, and a brook byers institute for sustainable systems fellow, will speak about how a new set of tools for the valuation and appraisal of renewable energy projects can enhance investment decision-making. 
 liam's legacy symposium 2023: humanitarian engineering with juan lucena 
 thursday, oct. 5 
 4 – 6 p.m. 
 coda building, ninth floor atrium 
 juan lucena, director of the humanitarian engineering undergraduate program and professor of engineering, design, and society at the colorado school of mines will visit georgia tech for the annual liam’s legacy symposium. lucena will explore the relationship between engineers, engineering, and the well-being of communities, social justice, and sustainability. 
 this event is presented by the center for sustainable communities research and education in partnership with the school of history and sociology, through a grant from the gertrude and william c. wardlaw fund in support of the conference on human rights, changes, and challenges. 
 sustainable careers and shared value panel 
 thursday, oct. 12 
 2 – 3:15 p.m. 
 scheller college of business, room 221 
 join the ray c. anderson center for sustainable business to hear from three panelists at various stages in their careers and diverse types of corporations about how sustainability is incorporated and how it has shaped their roles. 
 more information and registration 
 here . 
 lullwater preserve (emory) bird walk 
 friday, oct. 13 
 7 a.m. – 12:30 p.m. 
 meet at cherry emerson 
 ride the gt / emory bus with birdwatchers @ gt to lullwater preserve, a beautiful, forested park on emory’s druid hills campus. open to beginner and expert birders alike — make sure to rsvp if you need binoculars. 
 for more information and registration, click 
 here . 
 campus energy challenge 
 oct. 16 – 22 
 residence halls across campus 
 housing and residence life’s annual energy competition takes place the week of oct. 16. the competition will give all campus residents a chance to see the daily energy use of their residence halls, along with tips on how to reduce their individual use. the residence hall that reduces its use the most will win a prize. 
 contact 
 malte weiland , senior sustainability project manager, auxiliary services, for more information. 
 a conversation with victor luckerson, author of ‘built from the fire ’ 
 tuesday, oct. 17 
 7 – 8:30 p.m. 
 scheller college of business, room 100 
 a panel discussion with victor luckerson, author of 
 built from the fire , moderated by todd michney, associate professor in the school of history and sociology. the book follows a multigenerational saga of a family and a community in tulsa’s greenwood district, known as “black wall street,” that in one century survived the 1921 tulsa race massacre, urban renewal, and gentrification. 
 staff council drive-thru recycling event 
 wednesday, oct. 18 
 2 – 4 p.m. 
 o’keefe building parking lot, 151 sixth st. nw 
 the georgia tech staff council and cpec subcommittee are hosting a recycling collection event for faculty and staff. drop off items such as plastic bottles, mixed paper, household batteries, electronics, and glass. 
 brook byers institute for sustainable systems seminar series – dylan brewer: who heeds the call in an energy emergency? evidence from smart thermostat data 
 thursday, oct. 19 
 3 – 4 p.m. 
 hybrid event: bbiss offices, 760 spring st., suite 118, and on 
 teams 
 dylan brewer, an assistant professor in the school of economics and bbiss fellow, will present research exploring the relationship between compliance with calls to conserve energy during a shortage situation and in an environment of political polarization. 
 climate and innovation business forum 
 friday, oct. 20 
 1 – 5:30 p.m. 
 global learning center 
 the climate and innovation business forum will convene stakeholders from various sectors to explore strategies for driving innovative climate solutions. attendees are invited to participate in discussions on harnessing the potential of climate technology, forging innovative collaborations, and mobilizing capital for environmental and social impact. 
 administration and finance virtual town hall 
 friday, oct. 20 
 2 – 3 p.m. 
 virtual via zoom 
 gatech.zoom.us / j / 95142941085 
 celebrate sustainability month at the a&f virtual town hall and learn about activities designed to promote sustainability across the institute. we will share highlights from the recently published sustainability next plan, developing strategies from the climate action plan, and how georgia tech is harnessing the power of data throughout our utility management efforts to foster a living campus for all. 
 georgia tech undergraduate sustainability education panel 
 tuesday, oct. 24 
 11 a.m. – noon 
 the kendeda building for innovative sustainable design, room 210 
 learn more about sustainability-focused campus educational opportunities at this panel discussion and hear from affiliated faculty, staff, and students. snacks will be provided. 
 surviving the “zombie apocalypse” at kendeda 2023 
 friday, oct. 27 
 4 – 7:30 p.m. 
 the kendeda building for innovative sustainable design 
 the kendeda building is an example of resilient infrastructure, with its potable water storage, solar power system, composting toilets, and ability to grow food on its rooftop garden. this office of sustainability event will focus on the lessons that the kendeda building has taught us about sustainability, regenerative design, and the benefits of being more self-sufficient. join us for a spooky kendeda building tour, snacks, and lessons in sewing and food pickling. 
 get tickets 
 here . 
 extension of community: what it means to be sustainable in a digital world 
 throughout october 
 locations include the kendeda building, the library, and the georgia tech media bridge 
 experience an interactive art exhibit at the intersection of science and technology addressing sustainability and the climate crisis. 
 how have our technological and digital developments helped and harmed us? 
 how can we be more digitally sustainable? 
 what are the limits of technology and how can we shift our behaviors to help heal the planet? 
 fourteen artists and scientists reflect on community and sustainability within their practice and question the impact of technology on the environment and society. the exhibit, curated by birney robert, addresses themes of plastics and waste, social and environmental justice, and imagined futures. 
 for more information, 
 click here . 
 explore the 
 campus sustainability month 2023 calendar 
 for a comprehensive list of events and updates. campus groups, departments, and organizations interested in adding their sustainability-focused event to the calendar can email sustain.gatech.edu. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 the sustainability next plan transforms vision into reality 
 contact 
 abby bower 
 program support coordinator 
 office of sustainability 
 email 
 abby.bower@sustain.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000