physics to host climate talk with former u.s. secretary of energy, nobel laureate 
 physicist steven chu was the first person appointed to the u.s. cabinet after having won a nobel prize. on april 26, he will deliver a public lecture at georgia tech on climate change and innovative paths towards a more sustainable future. 
 apr 20, 2023 
 on april 26, 2023, the 
 school of physics 
 and 
 college of sciences 
 at georgia tech will welcome stanford university physicist 
 steven chu 
 to speak on climate change and innovative paths towards a more sustainable future. chu is the 1997 co-recipient of the nobel prize in physics, and in his former role as u.s. secretary of energy, became the first scientist to hold a u.s. cabinet position. 
 about the talk 
 the event 
 is part of the school of physics “inquiring minds” public lecture series, and will be held at the 
 ferst center for the arts . 
 the talk is free and open to campus and the atlanta community, and no rsvp is required. refreshments begin at 4:30, and the lecture will start at 5 p.m. et. 
 “the multiple industrial and agricultural revolutions have transformed the world,” chu recently shared in an abstract for the lecture. “however, an unintended consequence of this progress is that we are changing the climate of our planet. in addition to the climate risks, we will need to provide enough clean energy, water, and food for a more prosperous world that may grow to 11 billion by 2100.” 
 the talk will discuss the significant technical challenges and potential solutions that could provide better paths to a more sustainable future. “how we transition from where we are now to where we need to be within 50 years is arguably the most pressing set of issues that science, innovation, and public policy have to address,” chu added. 
 the event’s faculty host is 
 daniel goldman , dunn family professor in the school of physics at georgia tech. 
 about steven chu 
 steven chu 
 is the william r. kenan, jr. professor of physics and a professor of molecular and cellular physiology in the medical school at stanford university. 
 chu served as the 12 th 
 u.s. secretary of energy from january 2009 until the end of april 2013. as the first scientist to hold a u.s. cabinet position and the longest serving energy secretary, chu led several initiatives including arpa-e (advanced research projects agency – energy), the energy innovation hubs, and was personally tasked by president obama to assist in the deepwater horizon oil leak. 
 in the spring of 2010, chu was the 
 keynote speaker 
 for the georgia tech ph.d. and master's commencement ceremony. 
 prior to his cabinet post, chu was director of the lawrence berkeley national laboratory, where he was active in pursuit of alternative and renewable energy technologies, and a professor of physics and applied physics at stanford, where he helped launch bio-x, a multi-disciplinary institute combining the physical and biological sciences with medicine and engineering. previously he also served as head of the quantum electronics research department at at&t bell laboratories. 
 he is the co-recipient of the 1997 nobel prize in physics for his contributions to laser cooling and atom trapping. he is a member of the national academy of sciences, the american philosophical society, the american academy of arts and sciences, the pontifical academy sciences, and of seven foreign academies. he formerly served as president, and then chair of the american association for the advancement of science. 
 chu earned an a.b. degree in mathematics and a b.s. degree in physics from the university of rochester, and a ph.d. in physics from the university of california, berkeley, as well as 35 honorary degrees. 
 he has published over 280 papers in atomic and polymer physics, biophysics, biology, bio-imaging, batteries, and other energy technologies. he holds 15 patents, and an additional 15 patent disclosures or filings since 2015. 
 additional media 
 contact 
 jess hunt-ralston 
 director of communications 
 college of sciences at georgia tech 
 email 
 jess@cos.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000