preventing bike theft on campus 
 the georgia tech police department (gtpd) is currently investigating several thefts involving bicycles and scooters from the east and west campus residence halls. 
 oct 21, 2020 
 — atlanta, ga 
 fall has officially arrived. with that, many are taking to the great outdoors — often by bike to make the most of the convenience, health benefits, and environmentally friendly aspects of this mode of transportation. unfortunately, criminals want to make the most of bikes, too. 
 the georgia tech police department (gtpd) is currently investigating several thefts involving bicycles and scooters from the east and west campus residence halls. in each of these thefts, officers are seeing the use of inferior equipment being used to secure bikes. 
 “although we're operating in unfortunate circumstances, given the pandemic, criminals are still out and we have had several reports of stolen bicycles,” said sergeant jessica howard. “we encourage students to lock bikes using a quality, durable u-lock, use the designated locations to lock your bike, and make sure you register your bike with us. that helps us identify the owner of a stolen bike when it is recovered.” 
 bikes can be registered with the gtpd at 
 police.gatech.edu / crime-prevention / safety-tips / bicycle 
 — no matter the type. those who register their bikes with gtpd also receive a free water bottle. officers will be on campus in the coming weeks doing in-person registration on tuesdays and thursdays from 2 to 4 p.m. find out where to find them by following gtpd on social media ( facebook.com / gatechpd , 
 instagram.com / gatechpd , and 
 twitter.com / gatechpd ). 
 here are some additional tips to help prevent a criminal from taking your bike for a ride. 
 avoid using lightweight cables or chains, or low-quality u-locks, as these can be cut with relative ease. 
 the lock should always go through the frame. if possible, attach bicycles to bike racks through the frame and both wheels. if both wheels cannot be attached, be sure to attach the frame and one wheel. 
 do not attach the lock to parts of the bicycle that may be easily removed, such as the seat post or only the wheel. 
 check the lock before departing to ensure it is secured. 
 if you have a quick release for the seat or front wheel, take these items with you. 
 do not leave any free or easily detachable parts, such as headlights or bags, on the bike. 
 avoid leaving bicycles locked outside overnight. 
 more information on bicycling on campus can be found at 
 pts.gatech.edu / bicycling-georgia-tech 
 and 
 police.gatech.edu / crime-prevention / safety-tips / bicycle . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 alternative transportation 
 property and bicycle registration 
 contact 
 kristen bailey 
 institute communications 
 additional information 
 learn more about safe riding and how to secure your bike or scooter through the virtual ride smart class. 
 join the atlanta bike challenge this month to log your miles, earn rewards, and encourage others to get on their bike. 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000