pride month at georgia tech 
 resources for students and staff during pride month and beyond 
 june is recognized as pride month. here in atlanta, pride events take place in october, and this year georgia tech’s lgbtqia resource center will host events to mark pride after students and staff return to campus in the fall. 
 jun 08, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 for many across the u.s. and around the world, june is pride month in celebration of lgbtqia equality. we get two chances each year to show our support and celebrate pride at georgia tech. here in atlanta, pride events take place in october, and this year georgia tech’s 
 lgbtqia resource center 
 will host events to mark pride after students and staff return to campus in the fall. 
 regardless of whether you observe pride in june or october, there are resources available on campus to support lgbtqia+ students and staff as well as opportunities to become a better ally. here is a closer look at some of those options. 
 qt chats 
 flag building, suite 140 june 16 and 30, 10 – 11 a.m. 
 (and continuing biweekly) 
 in-person biweekly discussions that happen at the georgia tech lgbtqia resource center. qt chats 
 will center discussion around gender and sexuality and are open to all students. 
 pride alliance / grad pride / t+ / ace space 
 the lgbtqia resource center advises 
 a variety of student organizations or student spaces . the links on 
 this page 
 will provide more information about these community-specific groups and how to get involved. 
 lavender graduation 
 each april, the resource center celebrates lgbtqia+ undergraduate and graduate students who are completing their degrees. the 
 lavender graduation ceremony 
 is open to any student who wishes to participate and faculty, staff, and classmates are invited to attend in support. 
 campus health and well-being resources 
 the georgia tech counseling center provides individual and group counseling for lgbtqia+ students. stamps health services is also available to assist students with their medical needs. 
 students seeking assistance from the counseling center or stamps health services should visit 
 care 
 first for a primary assessment and referral to on- and off-campus mental health and well-being resources. 
 student emergency fund 
 lgbtqia organizations at georgia tech have teamed up to launch a relief fund to assist queer and trans students with emergencies that arise in their time at tech. donations to the fund are now being accepted and can be contributed on the 
 lgbtqia student relief fund website. 
 safe space training june 22, 12:30 – 4:30 p.m. 
 these 
 virtual training sessions 
 are open to all employees, graduate students, postdocs, and georgia tech affiliates who have an interest in learning more about how to practice allyship to the lgbtqia community. 
 faculty and staff involvement 
 the 
 pride employee resource group (erg) 
 is one of six employee resource groups at georgia tech. the pride erg hosts professional development and community-building events throughout the year. any faculty or staff member is welcome to join the pride erg. while the group focuses on the concerns of tech’s lgbtqia community, allies are welcome to attend and participate in meetings and events. 
 the georgia tech research institute also has launched an inclusive community for employees who identify as members or allies of the lgbtq+ community. 
 find more information about affrimed@gtri here. 
 allyship guidance 
 the resource center has gathered 
 a wide variety of tips and guidelines 
 to help those who would like to become allies in developing more inclusive, welcoming, and supportive networks for lgbtqia students, staff, and faculty. 
 students and staff can always 
 reach out to the lgbtqia resource center directly , for opportunities to get involved or for support in finding community or care – whether it’s national pride month in june, atlanta’s pride in october, or any month of the year. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 steven norris 
 institute communications 
 email 
 snorris@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000