promoting the safety and welfare of minors on campus 
 a special duty of care and supervision is required to protect tech’s youngest learners. 
 youth programs 
 apr 04, 2023 
 it is estimated that, on an annual basis, more than 40,000 minors age 17 and under attend programs sponsored by the institute or conducted on campus. a special duty of care and supervision is required to protect tech’s youngest learners. to help support a safe and engaging environment for all who participate, volunteer, or work in these youth programs, the university system of georgia (usg) and georgia tech require that all programs serving minors be registered at tech’s youth programs website, 
 youthprograms.gatech.edu . 
 youth programs vary, from internships with high school students, to student organization outreach activities, to summer camps and mentoring / tutoring in local schools. campus and lab tours, and school field trips to the tech campus, are generally not considered youth programs. 
 “the breadth and depth of youth programs at georgia tech are extensive,” said kelly cross, institute policy manager in the office of ethics and compliance. “through conversations with program organizers, internship supervisors, building managers, and human resources representatives, it is clear to me that there is a passion for excellence in youth programming and outreach here.” 
 according to youth programs compliance, the exciting work occurring at tech also presents unique risks. to help mitigate these risks, youth programs has been actively implementing the 
 youth programs policy , which mandates program registration, safety protocols, and more to assist everyone involved in working with minors. 
 programs are required to register every calendar year, at least 30 days in advance of the program start date. failure to do so may result in the cancellation of programming. by registering, programs that work with minors will proactively receive information on the resources and policies developed for the protection of the minors and the program staff. 
 this spring, online information sessions (see schedule in sidebar) will be conducted to clarify policies, process requirements, and how to register a program. training will focus on key areas of responsibility for organizers of youth programs broadly, and specific sessions will also focus on requirements when minors want to intern or participate in research activities at tech. 
 visit youth programs 
 to learn more and register your program. questions may be sent directly to kelly cross at 
 kelly.cross@gatech.edu . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 youth programs 
 contact 
 kelly cross 
 institute policy manager / youth programs compliance 
 office of ethics and compliance 
 shawn scott 
 youth programs compliance 
 office of ethics and compliance 
 meg bailey 
 counsel, office of the general counsel 
 office of legal affairs 
 email 
 kelly.cross@gatech.edu 
 additional information 
 youth programs compliance 101 
 serves as an introduction to the youth programs policy and the requirements of organizing a youth program. the training will focus on six key areas of responsibility for program organizers. 
 thursday, april 6, from 1 to 2 p.m. 
 tuesday, april 11, from 11 a.m. to noon 
 rsvp 
 to register for youth programs compliance 101 webinars scheduled throughout the spring semester. additional sessions can be scheduled as needed. 
 youth programs compliance – internship requirements 
 covers the youth programs policy and the requirements of organizing a youth program through the lens of internships and minors in labs. the training will focus on six key areas of responsibility for program organizers, internship supervisors, and program support coordinators. 
 wednesday, april 12, from 9 to 10 a.m. 
 rsvp 
 to register for youth programs compliance – internships training webinars scheduled throughout the spring semester. additional sessions can be scheduled as needed. please reach out to youth programs compliance with any questions. 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000