register to attend 2017 atdc startup showcase 
 the advanced technology development center’s 2017 atdc startup showcase is may 11. 
 the annual atdc startup showcase is the premier atlanta event for technology entrepreneurs. (file photos) 
 apr 03, 2017 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the advanced technology development center (atdc), georgia’s technology incubator, will present more than 60 of the state’s most innovative and market-disrupting technology companies at the 2017 atdc startup showcase. 
 the annual event, which attracts nearly 1,000 attendees, is scheduled for may 11 at the georgia tech hotel and conference center from 1:30 p.m. to 5:30 p.m. ( register here .) 
 showcase is designed to give technology innovators, investors, corporate partners, entrepreneurs, university researchers and students an in-depth, first-hand look at georgia’s most successful emerging technology companies. 
 the event, which takes place during atlanta startup week, also celebrates atdc’s 37-year legacy of helping entrepreneurs learn, launch, scale and succeed in the formation of successful georgia technology startups. worldpay us — the global payments technology and services company, and creator of atdc’s fintech program — is the showcase’s premier sponsor. 
 “showcase is always an exciting time for us because attendees get to see the dynamic visions of our entrepreneurs from across georgia,” said jennifer bonnett, atdc’s general manager. 
 “our presenting companies have created products — from tools to combat fraud to disease management to clean energy — that solve problems, create meaningful impact in a host of industries and strengthen the georgia economy. 
 “what’s more, these companies also exist thanks to the financial support of the state of georgia, which funds atdc,” she said. 
 startups at atdc also receive direct support from some of incubator’s partners, such as the georgia research alliance, which provides seed investments. the startup companies also receive direct funding grants from a number of federal sponsors, including the national science foundation, department of energy, department of defense and national institutes of health, among others. 
 each year, those companies that meet the rigorous growth milestones are selected to graduate from the top-tier atdc signature program. two of those companies have already been acquired. 
 the 2017 graduating companies are: 
 first performance global: 
 provides a market leading card management and customer engagement platform for card issuers worldwide. 
 partpic (acquired): 
 its proprietary solution simplifies the search and purchase of replacement parts using visual recognition technology. 
 starmobile (acquired): 
 its codeless, cloud-based enterprise mobility platform delivers any application to any endpoint, with a native user experience, faster, simpler and at a lower cost than any other approach. 
 useriq: 
 through its customer growth platform, useriq empowers software-as-a-service companies to foster growth beyond the traditional funnel. 
 for more information about the showcase or to rsvp, please visit 
 http: / / atdcstartupshowcase.com . the cost to attend the event is $25 per person (early bird until april 12); $50 between april 13 and may 11, and $75 at the door. students and faculty of any georgia university enter free with valid id. 
 about atdc: 
 the advanced technology development center (atdc), a program of the georgia institute of technology, is the state of georgia’s technology startup incubator. founded in 1980 by the georgia general assembly, which funds it each year, atdc’s mission is to work with entrepreneurs in georgia to help them learn, launch, scale and succeed in the creation of viable, disruptive technology companies. since its founding, atdc has grown to become one of the longest running and most successful university-affiliated incubators in the united states, with its graduate startup companies raising $3 billion in investment financing and generating more than $12 billion in revenue in the state of georgia. to learn more, visit 
 atdc.org . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 atdc startup showcase 
 atdc 
 worldpay us 
 contact 
 for media inquiries, contact: 
 laura diamond 
 404.894.6016 
 laura.diamond@gatech.edu 
 email 
 peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000