registration begins for 2021 youth programs 
 for those on campus who work with youth programs, now is the time to consider registering your program for next year. 
 youth programs infographic 
 dec 08, 2020 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the holiday season is upon us, which means that planning for 2021 is well underway. for those on campus who work with youth programs, now is the time to consider registering your program for next year. 
 the 2021 youth programs registration form is now live and open on the 
 youth programs website . as a reminder, youth programs at georgia tech run on a calendar year basis, not an academic year. all youth programs must submit a registration form for review and approval at the start of the new year. the form must be submitted at least 30 days prior to the start of the program. 
 a youth program is an event that is designed specifically for minors where georgia tech faculty, staff, or students have direct contact with the participating minors. for those trying to determine whether their program falls under the umbrella of a youth program, this 
 infographic 
 can help you navigate and make that decision. 
 as 2021 approaches, the number of covid-19 cases continues to increase. a great way to minimize the spread of the virus and keep the georgia tech community safe is to offer youth programs virtually. “this alternative method still provides an opportunity for youth to receive the growth and development they need to succeed, and many programs made the switch over the summer and fall,” said sally robertson, counsel, ethics and compliance. 
 the registration and approval process remains the same for virtual programs as it does for the in-person program. however, there are a few differences to consider when hosting a youth program online rather than on campus. 
 for more information and resources on virtual youth programs, visit the 
 virtual youth programs 
 page on the youth programs website. questions can be directed to sally robertson at 
 sally.robertson@carnegie.gatech.edu . 
 virtual programs still require: 
 registration form 
 the registration form must be submitted no less than 30 days prior to the start of the program. 
 the registration form can be found on the youth programs website. 
 background checks 
 background checks are run through hr. 
 they are required for all those in direct contact with minors. 
 even in an online setting, a videoconference or an email is still considered direct contact. 
 training 
 training is administered throug d2l for employees and through the training request form for students and non-employees. 
 training is required for all those in direct contact with minors. 
 staff and volunteer code of conduct 
 all staff and volunteers, whether in direct contact or not, are required to sign the staff and volunteer code of conduct. 
 because virtual programs look a little different in terms of online expectations and behavior, there is a new code of conduct specifically for virtual programs. 
 it can be found on the youth programs website under virtual youth programs. 
 other changes and requirements to note 
 rule of three 
 with virtual programs, the supervision ratio changes to what is known as the ‘rule of three.’ 
 this means that in order to prevent a minor from being left alone with an adult chaperone, there must always be at least two adults on all communications, whether through email or videoconference. 
 this way there are always at least three people present: one child and two adults. 
 approved platforms 
 in order to prevent hacking and unauthorized sharing of personal or sensitive information, all virtual programs must use a georgia tech approved platform. 
 this means that georgia tech already has an account and an agreement in place with the vendor. 
 a list of approved video collaboration tools can be found on the services and support website. 
 mandatory reporter 
 because virtual programs offer a unique insight into a minor’s home and family life, the mandatory reporter requirements still apply. 
 for those staff and volunteers who may see something of concern through a videoconference, there is a responsibility to say something. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 youth programs 
 contact 
 sally robertson 
 ethics and compliance 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000