registration open for fall citizens police academy 
 georgia tech’s citizens police academy is a five-week program designed to educate and inform the tech community about issues related to law enforcement efforts on campus and how the georgia tech police department operates. 
 police sign at georgia tech's campus safety building. (photo: rob felt) 
 oct 06, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 georgia tech’s citizens police academy is a five-week program designed to educate and inform the tech community about issues related to law enforcement efforts on campus and how the georgia tech police department (gtpd) operates. the academy, which is accepting applications for fall, is open to all tech faculty, staff, and students. 
 “if you have questions about the operations of the department, the type of training the officers receive, the day-to-day function of the department, or if you just want to have a better understanding of law enforcement — this academy is for you,” said georgia tech sergeant jessica howard, academy coordinator. 
 the training, which begins oct. 21, includes classes on investigations, the clery act, k-9, law enforcement technology, firearms, emergency preparedness, and crime prevention. all classes are held from 5:30 to 7:30 p.m. at the georgia tech police department on tech’s campus. the program is free, but participants must commit to attend all sessions. 
 class size is limited. applicants must submit an online application by oct. 18 and undergo a limited background investigation. 
 howard believes the academy helps to develop and foster positive relations between the community and gtpd through education. 
 “i believe giving people the opportunity to gain insight into how and why a law enforcement agency operates the way it does — from administrative positions to the officers in the field — brings better understanding and, ultimately, long-lasting positive relationships,” howard said. 
 for schedule details and to register for the citizens police academy, visit 
 police.gatech.edu / citizens-police-academy . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 kristen bailey 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000