rotorjackets win collegiate drone racing championship 
 the rotorjackets, a georgia tech student drone racing team, recently placed first in the collegiate drone racing championship in grand forks, north dakota. 
 students matt kelsey, luke lawver, and tanner beard participated in the 2022 collegiate drone racing championship in grand forks, north dakota. 
 jun 16, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the 
 rotorjackets , a georgia tech student drone racing team, recently placed first in the 
 collegiate drone racing championship 
 in grand forks, north dakota. the competition was hosted by the university of north dakota. the team took three students to the championship, fielding a team for the first time since 2017. 
 “we practice for big races like this every weekend in the burger bowl, and put in countless hours in our simulator,” said tanner beard, a mechanical engineering major and vice president of racing for rotorjackets. the simulator, called velocidrone, is run on participants’ personal computers with their controllers. 
 beard was joined at the drone racing championship by teammates matt kelsey, a computer science major; and luke lawver, an aerospace engineering major; with contributions from teammate jordan moss, an electrical engineering major. beard also recently competed in the international open drone race, representing rotorjackets and finishing 17th in the world. 
 during the academic year, rotorjackets host weekly events both in person and online and have weekend signup times for students to practice flying drones. once a month they meet in the invention studio to build, repair, and troubleshoot their devices. the group also works with local schools to teach k-12 students about drones, drone racing, and drone applications. 
 though the group isn’t meeting during the summer, students can still learn more about the club at 
 rotorjackets.tech 
 or by joining the group’s 
 discord . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 kristen bailey 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000