searches begin for college of design, international initiatives 
 provost steve mclaughlin has convened two separate search committees tasked with selecting the new dean for the college of design and the new vice provost for international initiatives. 
 mar 31, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 provost steve mclaughlin has convened two separate search committees tasked with selecting the new dean for the college of design and the new vice provost for international initiatives. 
 the two searches will run concurrently and will fill the upcoming vacancies by dean steve french and vice provost yves berthelot, respectively. 
 the search for the new dean of the college of design will be chaired by kaye husbands fealing, dean of the ivan allen college of liberal arts, and supported by the russell reynolds associates search firm. adam stulberg, sam nunn professor and chair in the sam nunn school of international affairs, will lead the search for the vice provost for international initiatives. michael toney, director of academic administration, will serve as administrative lead for both searches. 
 “dean french and vice provost berthelot have provided invaluable leadership to their respective areas and we are grateful for their service to tech, particularly over the past year,” mclaughlin said. “i invite faculty, staff, and students to join us as we search for our new leaders. community input is welcome and encouraged as we identify the best candidates to continue our forward momentum as an institution and realize the goals set forth in our new strategic plan.” 
 virtual town halls for faculty, staff, and students to learn about the respective search processes and timelines, and to provide feedback on the characteristics of ideal candidates have been scheduled as follows: 
 college of design: 
 thursday, april 8 (separate faculty, staff, and student meetings throughout day) 
 international initiatives: 
 thursday, april 8, at 11 a.m. (campuswide) 
 search details, including committee rosters, ongoing updates, and specific information on the town hall sessions for each search can be found at 
 https: / / provost.gatech.edu / design-dean-search 
 and 
 https: / / provost.gatech.edu / vice-provost-international-initiatives-search . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 michael toney 
 director, academic administration 
 office of the provost 
 email 
 provostsoffice@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000