sga hosts week of political events 
 every year, in an attempt to increase awareness surrounding voter registration and civic participation, the government relations committee of the student government association teams up with alpha phi alpha to host wreck the vote. 
 sep 30, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 every year, in an attempt to increase awareness surrounding voter registration and civic participation, the government relations committee of the student government association (sga) teams up with alpha phi alpha to host wreck the vote. this year is no different, with a week's worth of events focused on informing potential voters, beginning with voter registration tabling at tech walkway, sept. 28–30 from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. 
 a debate 
 will take place among the four major student-led political organizations on campus: college democrats, college republicans, young democratic socialists of america, and young americans for liberty. this debate will be held on sept. 30 at 7 p.m. in the clary theatre of the bill moore student success center and will provide these organizations a platform to discuss major issues in the u.s. and atlanta. 
 this year, elections are also being held for the mayor of atlanta as well as city council positions. sga hopes to help students go beyond the tech campus and become active members of the community. sga has partnered with wsb-tv to host the top five mayoral candidates – antonio brown, andre dickens, sharon gay, felicia moore, and kasim reed – right on tech’s campus. 
 the forum 
 will take place at 9 a.m. on saturday, oct. 2, in the main auditorium of the kendeda building for innovative sustainable design; it will also be livestreamed 
 here . sga hopes the event will help students gain insight into a complex race involving 14 total candidates. 
 beyond the week, sga will continue to encourage students to get registered in their state and participate in our electoral system. there will be more speakers brought on campus to continue to help inform students leading up to election day, nov 2. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 connor white 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000