shannon to lead university of north georgia, hubbard in interim leadership role for administration and finance at georgia tech 
 the board of regents of the university system of georgia (usg) voted earlier today to name mike shannon, interim executive vice president for administration and finance (a&f), president of the university of north georgia (ung) 
 jun 01, 2023 
 the 
 board of regents of the 
 university system of georgia (usg) 
 voted earlier today 
 to 
 name mike shannon, interim executive vice president for administration and finance (a&f) and interim chief business officer , president of the university of north georgia (ung). shannon will start his new role on july 1. 
 “i could not be prouder of 
 mike for 
 this appointment , which is a recognition 
 of 
 his 
 extraordinary 
 leadership 
 contributions to georgia tech,” said president 
 ángel 
 cabrera. “ i am certain he will 
 have a transformative impact 
 at 
 ung , 
 and i 
 look forward to working 
 with him , as 
 a colleague and fellow georgia tech alum, 
 to continue to strengthen 
 public higher education in our state .” 
 shannon has 
 served 
 in various leadership roles 
 at tech 
 over the years , 
 and 
 most recently 
 led 
 the 
 initiatives 
 underway in a&f to improve how administrative services are delivered across the institute. this includes administrative excellence and the associated launch of the administrative services center, the budget reform initiative, the hr transformation project, data excellence, the institute’s sustainability plan, and the comprehensive campus plan. 
 prior to his role in a&f, shannon led the development and rollout of georgia tech’s 
 innovative 
 covid-19 surveillance testing program and 
 clia testing laboratory , 
 which 
 allowed 
 for the collection, 
 processing , 
 and data management 
 of thousands of samples 
 daily 
 on campus and in the 
 georgia 
 st ate capitol during two legislative sessions . 
 as a member of the institute’s executive leadership team and a retired army officer, shannon also served as the executive sponsor for resources that support georgia 
 tech’s 
 mission 
 of progress and service and the thousands of yellow jackets and their family members who have proudly served or are currently serving in the united states military. 
 as part of the a&f leadership transition plan, 
 cabrera 
 has 
 appoint ed 
 daren hubbard, vice president for information technology and chief information officer, 
 as the 
 new interim 
 executive vice president for a&f 
 and interim chief business officer until a permanent replacement is 
 announced . 
 hubbard will begin his new role on june 20. 
 his 
 appointment 
 will remain in place until the permanent position of executive vice president for administration and finance is announced. 
 “i thank 
 daren for his 
 support, leadership, and willingness to serve in this capacity as we move forward,” said cabrera. “ he is a 
 trusted and dedicated member of the institute’s senior leadership team and 
 will provide experienced oversight to a&f and its strategic initiatives during this transitional period.” 
 hubbard will continue to lead the 
 ongoing 
 strategic 
 initiatives 
 in 
 a&f 
 designed 
 to create a culture that supports stronger administrative performance and 
 a 
 shared responsibility among the campus community. 
 “i 
 am 
 honor ed 
 to help lead a&f during this transition,” said 
 hubbard . “i am delighted to work with president cabrera, the 
 e xecutive 
 l eadership 
 t eam, and my colleagues in a&f to 
 continue the work that delivers on the instructional, research, and service missions .” 
 the search process for the 
 next 
 executive vice president for a&f is 
 in progress , 
 and more information will be shared as soon as it is available. 
 contact 
 rachael pocklington 
 institute communications 
 email 
 rpocklington@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000