share the l.o.v.e. across campus 
 members of the l.o.v.e. gt working group will join meetings of various campus groups and departments to talk about the institute’s values and share ways to further incorporate the values into our work. 
 apr 27, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 georgia tech continues to advance our 
 nine strategic values 
 with a campaign called 
 living our values every day 
 (l.o.v.e. gt). over the next few weeks, members of the l.o.v.e. gt working group will join meetings of various campus groups and departments to talk about the institute’s values and share ways to further incorporate them into our work. 
 the objective of the campaign is to help the entire community bring our values to life in tangible ways that allow us to fulfill the objectives we set forth in the strategic plan. regardless of a person’s role 
 — 
 student, faculty, staff, alumni, or affiliate 
 — 
 all of us can contribute by serving as examples of our values in our interactions with one another and with the communities we serve. 
 to accomplish the ambitious goals of the 
 10-year strategic plan , having a campus culture that supports institute values will be critical. the institute is integrating the values into performance planning through goal setting and through insights gained from a 
 campus survey . 
 opportunities to learn more about georgia tech’s strategic values include meetings of the alumni association staff on wednesday, april 28; the staff council leadership team on thursday, april 29; the employee engagement leadership council general meeting on thursday, may 6; and upcoming meetings of georgia tech’s 
 employee resource groups 
 (ergs). 
 additional images 
 related links 
 values-based learning is here 
 contact 
 victor rogers 
 institute communications 
 email 
 victor.rogers@comm.gatech.edu 
 additional information 
 georgia tech’s nine strategic values are: 
 students are our top priority. 
 we strive for excellence. 
 we thrive on diversity. 
 we celebrate collaboration. 
 we champion innovation. 
 we safeguard freedom of inquiry and expression. 
 we nurture the well-being of our community. 
 we act ethically. 
 we are responsible stewards. 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000