siemens opens innovation center in tech square 
 the german conglomerate is the 16th company to open an innovation center at georgia tech. 
 georgia tech's technology square is home to a growing innovation ecosystem of startup companies, innovation centers from established companies and research from institute students, faculty and staff. 
 apr 20, 2017 
 — atlanta, ga 
 representatives from siemens opened its data analytics and applications center in georgia tech’s technology square on thursday, making it the latest global corporation to open an innovation center on or near campus. 
 the 
 center 
 will help transportation providers use big data to improve operations and safety. for example, the siemens team will work with the city of atlanta to collect information from the atlanta streetcar and analyze data points to make the best use of the fleet. 
 siemens is the 16 th 
 company to open an 
 innovation center in tech square . these centers represent a diverse range of industries with a common goal of tapping into the innovation neighborhood’s vibrant network of students, faculty, researchers and startup entrepreneurs. 
 the data analytics and applications center represents an exciting next step in the longstanding relationship between georgia tech and siemens, said stephen e. cross, the institute’s executive vice president for research. 
 “siemens has been a longtime partner of the institute, and we are proud that they are now a part of the vision for tech square and the strategy that drives georgia tech as an institution,” cross said. “georgia tech plays a strategic role in growing georgia’s entrepreneurial ecosystem and continues to forge paths to new research and innovation that have impact on our city, state, and region. nowhere is that more evident than in tech square and nowhere is it is better realized than in centers like the siemens data analytics and applications center.” 
 here are some examples of the extensive collaboration between the institute and siemens: 
 georgia tech has partnered on more than 20 projects with siemens over the past four years in manufacturing, health care and energy. 
 for more than 15 years, the siemens foundation has collaborated with the center for education integrating science, mathematics and computing (ceismc). activities include improving k-12 science and math education in underserved communities; hosting the siemens competition in math, science and technology; and preparing students for the future of manufacturing. 
 siemens also recruits about 30 georgia tech students each year, primarily through 15 technical training programs that lead to direct hire upon completion. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 innovation centers at georgia tech 
 siemens news release 
 contact 
 for media inquiries about the innovation centers in georgia tech’s tech square please contact laura diamond, 
 laura.diamond@gatech.edu 
 for other information about the innovation centers, please contact greg king, 
 greg.king@gatech.edu 
 email 
 laura.diamond@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000