southeastern trade adjustment assistance center receives $1.3 million in federal funds 
 funding supports international competitiveness. 
 darren green, owner of the old wood co., in asheville, north, carolina, sought setaac's assistance to help his company better compete with low-cost foreign imports. (photo credit: travis bell) 
 aug 31, 2017 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the u.s. economic development administration (eda) has awarded $13.3 million in federal funds to support 11 trade adjustment assistance centers (taacs), including the 
 southeastern trade adjustment assistance center  (setaac) at georgia tech, which will receive $1.3 million. 
 taacs work to support a wide range of technical, planning, and business recovery projects that help companies and the communities that depend on them adapt to international competition and diversify their economies. 
 “the trump administration is working every day to help america’s manufacturers, their workers, and their communities,” u.s. secretary of commerce wilbur ross said in a statement. “this funding is one element of a government-wide effort to restore american jobs and strengthen u.s. manufacturing.” 
 the announced grants are for the second year of a funding cycle that runs from 2016 to 2021. 
 setaac, a program of the georgia institute of technology’s enterprise innovation institute (ei 2 ), was established in 1974. in addition to serving georgia, setaac works with companies in alabama, florida, kentucky, mississippi, north carolina, south carolina, and tennessee. 
 setaac provides up to $75,000 of matching funds for third-party consultants to help guide a client’s economic recovery. eligible manufacturing firms contribute a matching share to create and implement their respective recovery plan. 
 in fiscal year 2017, setaac worked with 45 clients, including 
 darren green of the old wood co. 
 in asheville, north carolina, and helped those firms generate more than $9.7 million in sales, and help save or create 143 jobs. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 for media inquiries, contact: 
 laura diamond 
 404.894.6016 
 laura.diamond@gatech.edu 
 email 
 peralte.paul@comm.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000