spirits of tech 
 though tech is not known as being home to numerous ghouls or goblins, a few speculative spirits have been encountered over time. 
 oct 23, 2023 
 georgia tech’s 140-year-old grounds boast a great deal of history. and although tech is not known as being home to numerous ghouls or goblins, a few speculative spirits have been encountered over time. 
 dramatic disturbances 
 dramatech theater originally occupied an old church on hemphill avenue in the 1940s. the theater company leased the space from the hemphill avenue church of god, which had relocated to a new facility following a fire. during the fire, some children were trapped on the second floor and died, causing the church to want to relocate, but the building was able to be repaired and reoccupied. it has been recounted by students who were part of dramatech at that time that, late at night, when alone, you could hear laughter, talking, and the sounds of moving chairs coming from the second floor. the building has since been torn down. 
 presidential poltergeists 
 some students have claimed run-ins with the ghost of lyman hall in and around his namesake building. tech’s second president became ill during his tenure, took a leave of absence, and died in 1905. he is said to maintain a presence to ensure students are behaving and studying appropriately. 
 animal spirits 
 though they have not generated any post-death sightings, two animal spirits buried on campus are very much a part of tech lore. sideways, tech’s most famous mutt, is buried on the west side of tech tower. his grave is known as a place where students throw spare change for good luck. tech has a second canine friend, socrates, who is buried on the lawn of the van leer building. socrates belonged to daniel fielder, a two-time tech alumnus and professor in the school of electrical and computer engineering, and was buried in 1981. 
 one to rule them all 
 perhaps tech’s most pervasive spirit is george p. burdell, who first enrolled at georgia tech in 1927 and has since made his presence felt in classrooms, at sporting events, and anywhere he encounters tech students and alumni around the world. if you’re ever in public and unsure if burdell is around, simply ask to have him paged. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 georgia tech living history program 
 georgia tech library archives 
 contact 
 kristen bailey 
 institute communications 
 additional information 
 learn more about tech's vivid history from the living history program. 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000