spring 2022 ien seed grant winners announced 
 the primary purpose of this program is to give first- or second-year graduate students in diverse disciplines working on original and un-funded research in micro- and nano-scale projects the opportunity to access the ien cleanroom. 
 may 17, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the institute for electronics and nanotechnology (ien) at georgia tech has announced the winners for the 
 2022 spring core facility seed grants . the primary purpose of this program is to give first- and second-year graduate students in diverse disciplines working on original and unfunded research in micro- and nano-scale projects the opportunity to access the most advanced academic cleanroom space in the southeast. in addition to accessing the high-level fabrication, lithography, and characterization tools in the labs, the awardees will have the opportunity to gain proficiency in cleanroom and tool methodology and access the consultation services provided by research staff members in ien. seed grant awardees are also provided travel support to present their research at a scientific conference. 
 in addition to student research skill development, this bi-annual grant program gives faculty with novel research topics the ability to develop preliminary data to pursue follow-up funding sources. the core facility seed grant program is supported by the southeastern nanotechnology infrastructure corridor (senic), a member of the national science foundation’s national nanotechnology coordinated infrastructure (nnci). 
 since the start of the grant program in 2014, 78 projects from ten different schools in georgia tech’s colleges of engineering and science, as well as the georgia tech research institute and three other universities, have been seeded. 
 the six winning projects in this round were awarded ien cleanroom and lab access time to be used over the next year. in keeping with the interdisciplinary mission of ien, the projects that will be enabled by the grants include research in semiconductor technology, metamaterials, quantum devices, polymer films, and materials analysis. 
 the spring 2022 ien core facility seed grant award winners are: 
 customized nonlinear metamaterials for photon upconversion 
 pi: wenshan cai | student: anjan goswami 
 school of electrical and computer engineering / school of materials science and engineering 
 fabricating semiconductor moiré quantum devices for quantum information applications 
 pi: zhigang jiang | student: wei-chen wang 
 school of physics 
 enhancing ferroelectric switching through sputter process control in alscn 
 pi: lauren garten | student: john wellington-johnson 
 school of materials science and engineering 
 self-repairing polymeric films as artificial solid-electrolyte interface enabling rechargeable zinc metal batteries 
 pi: seung woo lee | student: kun ryu 
 george w. woodruff school of mechanical engineering 
 new applications of raman spectroscopy for determining sediment provenance in the southern alps of new zealand 
 pi: karl lang | student: dru-ann harris 
 school of earth and atmospheric sciences 
 next-generation back-illuminated silicon photomultipliers with multi-layer antireflection coatings on textured surface 
 pis: anna erickson and yuguo tao | student: mackenzie duce 
 george w. woodruff school of mechanical engineering (nuclear and radiological engineering program) 
 the southeastern nanotechnology infrastructure corridor (senic), a member of the national nanotechnology coordinated infrastructure (nnci), is funded by nsf grant eccs-2025462. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 laurie haigh 
 email 
 dsgottfried@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000