staff council: upcoming elections and staff appreciation day 
 this week, georgia tech’s staff council will host two events — and one is a first for the organization. 
 staff appreciation day 
 sep 28, 2020 
 — atlanta, ga 
 this week, georgia tech’s  staff council  will host two events — and one is a first for the organization. 
 on wednesday, sept. 30, at 2 p.m., the council is hosting an online information session for tech employees who are interested in running for a three-year term as a regular member or applying for a one-year term as a committee member. during the session, current staff council leadership will share details about the upcoming election process, the timeline, and the organization’s goals and priorities. 
 “we are looking forward to meeting virtually with georgia tech staff who want to be more involved, who have great ideas to share, or who aspire to leadership outside of their day-to-day jobs,” said byron fitch, staff council chair. 
 click on the bluejeans link 
 here 
 to participate in the session. 
 and on thursday, oct. 1, the first-ever staff appreciation event will take place from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. on tech green and tech walkway. attendees can enjoy free food and music, and will receive a swag bag. 
 because of the ongoing public health crisis, protocols will be in place to help ensure the safety of staff who attend. face coverings will be required, hand sanitizing stations will be set up on tech green and tech walkway, and social distancing will be encouraged. registration is required. you will receive a qr code, which you can either print or have ready on your phone to enter the event. a confirmation email will be sent once your ticket has been reserved. 
 “our staff have been working tirelessly during these last several months,” candice bovian, chair of the council’s employee engagement committee, said. “we look forward to celebrating them during this fun-filled day.” 
 register to attend at 
 gatech.universitytickets.com . for more information, contact 
 stephanie.merrick@design.gatech.edu 
 or  candice.bovian@ohr.gatech.edu . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 register for staff appreciation day 
 georgia tech staff council 
 contact 
 stacy braukman 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000