state business transactions disclosure reports due jan. 31 
 georgia law requires that all institute employees disclose business transactions — conducted by themselves or family members — with the state or any state agency. 
 jan 05, 2024 
 georgia law requires that all institute employees disclose business transactions — conducted by themselves or family members — with the state or any state agency. 
 public officials and employees are required to disclose all business transactions occurring during the previous calendar year. reports for 2023 transactions are due jan. 31. 
 this requirement applies to transactions by the employee or any business in which the employee, spouse, or dependent has more than a 25% interest. there is an exception for transactions less than $250 where the total of all transactions does not exceed $9,000 in the calendar year.  if an employee has no business transactions to report, it is not necessary for that employee to file the state business transaction disclosure report. 
 d isclosure reports are being filed through the georgia government transparency and campaign finance commission’s legacy system, which is no longer accessible on their website. in order to file a report for 2023 business transactions, employees must contact haley barrett, director of communications for the georgia government transparency and campaign finance commission, at 
 hbarrett@ethics.ga.gov 
 or 470.355.6003 for assistance in completing the filing process or to answer any questions you may have. 
 definition of business transactions 
 business transactions mean the sale or leasing of any personal property, real property, or services on behalf of oneself or a third party as an agency, broker, dealer, or representative. it also applies to the purchase of surplus real or personal property on behalf of oneself or on behalf of any third party as an agency, broker, dealer, or representative. 
 contact 
 terry grumley bridges, ccep 
 interim compliance training manager 
 georgia tech office of ethics, compliance 
 office of the general counsel 
 email 
 terry.bridges@gtri.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000