staying safe through the holidays 
 in keeping with the need to help slow the spread of the coronavirus, governor brian kemp’s office recently issued an update encouraging all employees at state agencies to telework between dec. 21 and jan. 4 as staffing needs allow. 
 snow on campus 
 dec 16, 2020 
 — atlanta, ga 
 in keeping with the need to help slow the spread of the coronavirus, governor brian kemp’s office recently issued an update encouraging all employees at state agencies to telework between dec. 21 and jan. 4 as staffing needs allow. 
 as a reminder, georgia tech’s campus is closed the week of dec. 21 for the winter break. while many people may be taking additional time off the week of dec. 28, some employees may be planning to report to work during this time. these employees are encouraged to work from home if their work allows them to do so. since employees are allowed to report to work during this time, non-closure emergency will not be utilized. previously scheduled leave should continue as planned. 
 “if you are planning to work during this time and can work from home, please do,” said kelly fox, executive vice president for administration and finance. “with fewer people on campus during the holidays, now is the time to further reduce the density on campus to help keep everyone safe when coronavirus cases are spiking.” 
 employees, including essential workers, who do come to campus are expected to continue following established safety protocols, which include wearing face coverings, washing hands, 
 testing frequently , staying home if you are ill, and maintaining social distance – even when gathering in small and familiar groups. 
 the campus community should continue to follow the covid-19 
 guidance 
 established on campus, as well as public health guidance from the centers for disease control and prevention and the georgia department of public health. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 tech moving forward 
 cdc website: coronavirus disease 2019 
 georgia department of public health 
 contact 
 rachael pocklington 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000