staying safe while on break 
 reminders help employees stay safe before and during the break. 
 the thanksgiving holiday weekend will cause changes in the operational hours for campus services departments. 
 nov 18, 2020 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the institute is carefully 
 monitoring covid-19 cases on campus . recently, there has been an uptick in cases, reflecting what is happening across the country. while a majority of the cases on campus are student-related, employees have tested positive as well. 
 the coronavirus can affect anyone, which is why it is so important that we remain vigilant ­about wearing face coverings, washing hands, testing weekly, and keeping an appropriate distance – even when gathering in small and familiar groups. while we have focused on students 
 staying safe as they return home 
 to complete the fall semester, much of this advice applies to employees who will also want to gather with friends and family for the holidays. 
 a few helpful reminders before and during the break: 
 take advantage of the free asymptomatic surveillance testing before the break. 
 testing locations and hours . 
 traveling may increase the risk of getting and spreading covid-19. if you are traveling for the break, do not travel if: 
 you are sick or experiencing a fever, cough, or shortness of breath. 
 you test positive for covid-19 within 10 days prior to travel. 
 you have close contact with someone who has covid-19. 
 before traveling, familiarize yourself with the public health guidelines or mandates in the location(s) you’ll be visiting. in addition, georgia tech researchers have developed a tool that can help estimate the potential risk of exposure involved with a trip. visit 
 covid19risk.biosci.gatech.edu 
 to access this interactive map. 
 if flying, check travel requirements. you may need to provide paperwork showing a recent negative test result. georgia tech’s surveillance testing is not a diagnostic test. visit 
 testing locations and hours 
 for information on types of testing and how to obtain one. 
 if driving, bring face coverings and hand sanitizer for stops at gas stations and rest areas. 
 if staying home, the 
 centers for disease control and prevention 
 offers guidance on protecting yourself and others during the thanksgiving break. 
 while you are away from campus, continue to follow health and safety measures — including the 
 daily self-checklist , social distancing, proper hygiene, and wearing a face covering. 
 if you are experiencing covid-19 symptoms or have been exposed to someone who has tested positive, the 
 covid-19 decision tree 
 will help guide you through what steps to take next. 
 stay vigilant before and during the holidays. don’t just do it for yourself — do it for your loved ones. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 covid-19 testing locations and hours 
 tech moving forward 
 contact 
 rachael pocklington 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000