steven lim to deliver aapi heritage month lecture 
 aapi heritage month recognizes and honors the contributions, achievements, and influence of asian americans and pacific islander americans (aapi) who have shaped the culture and history of the united states. 
 steven lim 
 apr 12, 2023 
 georgia tech’s aapi heritage month lecture will feature steven lim, ceo of watcher entertainment and former executive producer at buzzfeed. he created and hosted 
 worth it , buzzfeed’s biggest food show and a three-time streamy award and one-time webby award winner. 
 lim’s lecture, focusing on the impact of media representation in promoting diversity and amplifying aapi voices, will be held april 18, from 5 to 6:30 p.m. at the clary theatre in the bill moore student success center. a reception with light refreshments will follow. register for the event 
 here . 
 while aapi heritage month is widely recognized in may, tech’s office of institute diversity, equity, and inclusion and the asian american student association celebrate the event in april before the semester ends. aapi heritage month recognizes and honors the contributions, achievements, and influence of asian americans and pacific islander americans who have shaped the culture and history of the u.s. 
 “in light of the increase in violence and discrimination against aapi communities, the annual celebration takes on even more importance,” said sun graham, president of the asian american student association. “this is an important month that highlights asian culture at georgia tech, a demographic that encompasses over 40% of students on the atlanta campus.” 
 as a korean american adoptee, graham said she didn’t grow up with a strong asian presence within her community. 
 “aapi heritage month allows my asian identity not only to be seen, but celebrated through events and initiatives that bring the asian community together,” she said. “as i close out on my second and final year of being the president of the asian american student association and being awarded student leader of the year at georgia tech, i feel honored to have been given the position to host aapi heritage month alongside our wonderful board. it is important to me to dedicate the time and energy to promoting events that make a positive impact on georgia tech’s campus and amplifies asian voices.” 
 follow georgia tech’s aasa on instagram @gtaasa 
 for other aapi heritage month events 
 click here . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 victor rogers 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000