surveillance testing sites change next week 
 warm weather has made it conducive to hold asymptomatic surveillance testing primarily outdoors. now, as the season changes to fall, testing sites are changing, too. 
 covid-19 testing 
 sep 30, 2020 
 — atlanta, ga 
 warm weather has made it conducive to hold asymptomatic surveillance testing primarily outdoors. now, as the season changes to fall, testing locations are changing, too. 
 the site at bobby dodd stadium will close for the semester at 5 p.m. on friday, oct. 2. in its place, the site at the gt connector – located just across from the stadium, connected to the towers and glenn residence halls – will be open monday through friday, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., beginning oct. 5. this site has already been in use on campus, but with limited operating hours. 
 an additional site will open monday, oct. 5, at price gilbert library, in the main entrance on cherry street. this site's hours will be monday and tuesday, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.; wednesday through thursday, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.; and friday, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 
 tech’s other outdoor testing location at the curran street parking deck site will close on friday, oct. 9. a replacement site will be announced soon, at 
 health.gatech.edu / coronavirus / testing . other popup sites will continue to open throughout the semester as needed. 
 all students, faculty, and staff on campus are encouraged to get tested weekly. to register for testing, visit 
 mytest.gatech.edu . for covid-19 reporting information, visit 
 health.gatech.edu / coronavirus / health-alerts . 
 beginning monday, oct. 5: 
 gt connector 
 116 bobby dodd way nw.  map and directions . 
 hours starting oct. 5: 
 monday – friday, 9 a.m. – 5 p.m. 
 price gilbert (main entrance off of cherry street) 
 hours starting oct. 5: 
 monday – tuesday, 9 a.m. – 5 p.m. 
 wednesday – thursday, 9 a.m. – 6 p.m. 
 friday, 9 a.m. – 5 p.m. 
 other asymptomatic testing sites: 
 curran street parking deck (level 2) 
 turner place entrance facing nelson-shell residence hall, near west village dining.  map and directions . 
 hours : monday – friday, 9 a.m. – 5 p.m. 
 760 spring street (1st floor) 
 across from the coda building.  map and directions . 
 hours : wednesdays and fridays, 9 a.m. – 5 p.m.; thursdays, 9 a.m. – 7 p.m. 
 caddell building 
 280 ferst drive nw, next to the pettit building. 
 map and directions . 
 hours : mondays and tuesdays, 1 – 4 p.m. 
 north ave (centennial room) 
 across from north avenue dining hall entrance. 
 map and directions . 
 hours : wednesdays and thursdays, noon – 4 p.m. 
 tenth & home (activity room) 
 building a.  map and directions . 
 hours : fridays, noon – 4 p.m. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 testing sites and locations 
 register for surveillance testing 
 contact 
 sara warner 
 student life 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000