tech launches internal search for vice president of commercialization 
 a search committee has been convened to select tech's new vice president for commercialization. 
 jun 16, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 chaouki t. abdallah, executive vice president for research, has convened a search committee to select the new vice president for commercialization and chief commercialization officer. the search is open to current tenured members of the georgia tech faculty. 
 the search will be chaired by raheem beyah, dean and southern company chair in the college of engineering, with the new vice president anticipated to start in the early fall semester. the vice president will lead georgia tech’s newly established office of commercialization, which includes technology licensing and venturelab. the vice president will develop and implement the strategic direction for the office to serve as the engine for a thriving entrepreneurial ecosystem on campus, to include licensing and commercialization strategies. raghupathy “siva” sivakumar, professor and wayne j. holman chair in the school of electrical and computer engineering, has served in the role in an interim capacity since november. 
 “the office of commercialization, under the leadership of the new vice president, will bring together commercialization and technology transfer activities from across the institute and facilitate critical connections between tech and the organizations excited about the innovations being created by our faculty, staff, and students,” abdallah said. “many thanks to siva for his leadership and his service as the interim over these several months, and many thanks to our search chair, dean beyah, and the search committee for their dedication to the process.” 
 search details, including a committee roster and timeline, as well as ongoing updates can be found on the  search site . 
 inquiries and nominations are invited and should be sent confidentially to 
 monique@gatech.edu . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 office of the executive vice president for research (evpr) 
 inquiries and nominations are invited and should be sent confidentially to 
 monique@gatech.edu . 
 email 
 monique@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000