tech prepares to welcome new student employees 
 the administrative services center is looking forward to welcoming thousands of new student employees for the fall semester. 
 aug 08, 2023 
 the administrative services center (asc) is looking forward to welcoming thousands of new student employees for the fall semester. to help them complete the hiring and onboarding process, the asc will host the annual student employee onboarding event aug. 16-18 on the third floor of the clough undergraduate learning commons. the event is open to all newly hired graduate and undergraduate student employees who need assistance completing their in-person onboarding requirements (e.g., form i-9 verification and notarized georgia security questionnaire). 
 all student employees must complete all steps of the onboarding process, including the in-person requirements, and be hired in oneusg connect before beginning work. 
 new student employees should visit 
 ohr.gatech.edu / student-onboarding 
 for step-by-step instructions on completing the onboarding process, including 
 required documentation . 
 selecting a time slot 
 email communications will be sent directly to newly hired student employees who have already completed the online student hiring packet ( step 1 of the onboarding process ) but who still need to complete the in-person onboarding requirement. these students will have the ability to select a 30-minute time slot between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. on aug. 16, 17, or 18. 
 need to complete in-person onboarding but cannot attend this event? 
 if you are a newly hired student and need to complete your form i-9 and / or notarized georgia security questionnaire, but cannot attend this in-person event, contact the asc for assistance about onboarding and all questions related to working at georgia tech. 
 call 404.385.1111 to schedule an appointment at the asc. 
 schedule a walk-up appointment online  here . 
 submit an online request for help ticket  here . you will need to login for enhanced services. 
 if you are in the u.s. but not in the atlanta area and need a remote option, please contact the asc to find an appropriate location near you. 
 already completed the in-person onboarding? 
 great! student employees who have already completed in-person onboarding at the asc, located at 500 tech parkway, do not need to attend the student employee onboarding event. 
 other important notes 
 the student employee onboarding event is not an opportunity for students to find a campus job. it is the final step in paperwork processing for those hired into an already accepted campus position. if you are looking for a job, visit the 
 student employment webpage 
 for helpful resources. 
 hiring managers and their hiring support staff are encouraged to be prepared and familiarize themselves with new and helpful resources designed to promote a seamless experience. learn more 
 here . 
 the asc is here to help students and managers navigate hiring and onboarding processes. visit the 
 asc portal 
 for assistance. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 student employment website 
 student onboarding 
 administrative services center portal 
 contact 
 rachael pocklington 
 institute communications 
 email 
 rpocklington@gatech.edu 
 additional information 
 improving the hiring process from start to finish 
 since opening less than a year ago, the asc has been dedicated to analyzing the student hiring process and developing innovative solutions to improve the experience. this includes partnering with georgia tech human resources and others to develop new and improved guides and toolkits for hiring students. 
 improved integrations with gradworks improves the flow of information to the asc and reduces process time. 
 new erequest report enables units to have greater visibility into the hiring process. 
 additional staff are being hired to assist with seasonal volume. 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000