tech square phase 3 utility work to affect vehicular traffic on fifth street 
 both lanes of fifth street between west peachtree street and spring street will be closed to vehicular traffic to ensure safety as utility work continues on tech square phase 3. 
 apr 26, 2024 
 utility work on fifth street is resuming monday, april 29, and will necessitate the closure of both lanes to vehicular traffic between west peachtree street and spring street to help ensure the safety of motorists and construction crews as work continues on tech square phase 3. 
 this closure is expected to last four to five weeks but will be paused thursday, may 2, through sunday, may 5, to accommodate heavy traffic anticipated during tech’s commencement ceremonies. 
 details of the closure: 
 fifth street will be closed between west peachtree street and spring street monday through friday from 7 a.m. to 4 p.m. (except thursday, may 2, and friday, may 3.) detour signs will be in place to help navigate the change in traffic patterns. outside of these days and times, metal plates will be in place to allow two-way vehicular traffic. 
 sidewalks to the north and south of fifth street will remain open to pedestrians for the next four to five weeks. sidewalk closures are likely in the future. 
 bicyclists will be required to walk their bikes on the sidewalks during closure times. 
 parallel parking on the south side of fifth street will be available outside of the construction hours (monday through friday, 7 a.m. to 4 p.m.). 
 changes to stinger transit services will be posted on the 
 parking and transportation website . 
 please see the attached diagrams for pedestrian, bike, and traffic flow information. 
 scaffolding over spring street pedestrian walkway 
 the contractor is currently installing scaffolding over the left lane of spring street to enhance pedestrian safety. 
 installation is expected to be complete on friday, april 26. 
 the scaffolding will remain in place for one year. 
 during scaffolding installation, pedestrians will be diverted to the west sidewalks on abercrombie place and fifth street. 
 updates on campus construction projects, including tech square phase 3, can be found on 
 infrastructure and sustainability’s website . 
 additional media 
 related links 
 campus construction notices 
 campus bus - stinger routes 
 contact 
 lindsey cottingham 
 capital projects lead 
 infrastructure and sustainability 
 404-433-4268 
 email 
 lindsey.cottingham@facilities.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000