things to do in atlanta over spring break 
 as the weather begins to warm, and the flowers begin to bloom, opportunities to explore the city or attend athletics events abound. 
 bright yellow blooms of golden ragwort (packera aurea) are visible in the ecocommons near the kendeda building for innovative sustainable design. photo by allison carter. 
 mar 15, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 spring break is quickly approaching. while many students will head home or on vacation, some will stay on campus. luckily, there is always something fun to do in atlanta. 
 as the weather begins to warm, and the flowers begin to bloom, opportunities to explore the city or attend athletics events abound. 
 men’s tennis vs. virginia 
 friday, march 18, 5 p.m. 
 georgia tech hosts the virginia cavaliers at the ken byers tennis complex. 
 baseball vs. wake forest 
 saturday, march 19, 4 p.m. 
 georgia tech hosts wake forest at mac nease baseball park. 
 baseball vs. kennesaw state 
 wednesday, march 23, 6 p.m. 
 georgia tech hosts the kennesaw state owls at mac nease baseball park. 
 dunwoody nature center bird walk 
 saturday, march 26, 8 – 10 a.m. 
 the dunwoody nature center offers a free bird walk with the georgia audubon. the walk is a great walk to learn about georgia’s resident and migrating birds. registration is requested in advance. 
 atlanta science festival 
 through march 26 
 this event has already begun and will continue through the end of spring break. some events include geocaching around the city and walking through the forests of fernbank. these events also range in age of audience and location. the overall goal is to foster enthusiasm for the sciences all around atlanta. the festival culminates with the exploration expo on march 26 from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. in piedmont park. 
 ncaa swimming and diving championships 
 through march 26 
 both women’s and men’s finals will take place on campus at the mcauley aquatic center during spring break. 
 storyteller at the swan gallery 
 through march 31 
 the swan coach house gallery is hosting storyteller, an exhibition that attempts to tell how stories have changed over time through many different forms of art, including lithographs and sculptures. attendance is free. the exhibition runs through march 31, and an artist talk will take place saturday, march 19, at 3 p.m. 
 world of coca-cola 
 through march 31 
 the world of coca-cola is running a special on its friends and family four-pack of tickets. from march 14-31, guests can purchase up to four general admission tickets to the downtown attraction for $50 – a savings of $22. no discount code is required. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 connor white 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000