things to do over thanksgiving break 
 thanksgiving break is quickly approaching, and while some people are going to be making the journey home, many are staying on campus. 
 students walking amid fall leaves 
 nov 22, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 thanksgiving break is quickly approaching, and while some people are going to be making the journey home, many are staying on campus. with five free days, there is plenty of time to explore attractions in the atlanta area. 
 the 
 piedmont holiday gift market 
 is being held this weekend from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. on both saturday and sunday. the market will transform the park into a winter wonderland with hot cocoa and music. hundreds of local artists will be selling holiday-themed items ranging from wreaths to jewelry. this event is close to campus in piedmont park and free to explore, so it is a perfect way to get into the holiday spirit. 
 garden lights, holiday nights 
 takes place behind piedmont park in the atlanta botanical garden. every year, the gardens are covered in lights to celebrate the season. this year, the glowing grove and ice goddess add a new twist to the traditions. tickets are available each night from 5 to 10 p.m. 
 several ice rinks around midtown will get people moving any time of the day. the two closest ice rinks to campus are at 
 park tavern in piedmont park 
 and 
 atlantic station . park tavern tickets are $15, and atlantic station tickets are $16. tickets may sell out ahead of time, so make sure to plan accordingly. 
 lights of life 
 is the perfect drive-thru showing of lights for anyone who wants to see houses decorated with lavish light displays. every night, the area is transformed with lights, a petting zoo, and train rides. the cost is $10 per car. 
 on campus, students can also support georgia tech athletics at home games during the break. volleyball hosts florida state on saturday, nov. 26, at 1 p.m. at o’keefe gymnasium. men’s basketball hosts north alabama on saturday, nov. 26, at 4 p.m. at mccamish pavilion. see a 
 full sports schedule 
 and 
 ticket information . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 connor white 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000