three students awarded nsf graduate research fellowships 
 three students in the georgia tech school of electrical and computer engineering (ece) have received funding through the national science foundation (nsf) graduate research fellowship program (grfp). 
 (clockwise from left) tony wang, biya haile, justin ting 
 may 20, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 three students in the georgia tech school of electrical and computer engineering (ece) have received funding through the national science foundation (nsf) graduate research fellowship program (grfp). the fellowships, which provide a three-year annual stipend of $34,000, along with a $12,000 cost of education allowance, are awarded to outstanding students in nsf-supported science, technology, engineering, and mathematics fields who are pursuing research-based graduate degrees. 
 biya haile 
 is a mechanical engineering senior who will graduate this summer. he will remain at georgia tech this fall as he begins his ph.d. studies in ece with professor oliver brand as his advisor. as an undergraduate, haile conducted research with brand in the area of microelectromechanical systems (mems). 
 justin ting 
 graduated with his b.s.e.e. degree and a computer science minor in fall 2020. he plans to start pursuing his ph.d. this fall at the university of michigan, ann arbor in the electrical engineering and computer science department. while at georgia tech, ting worked in the integrated circuits and systems research lab on a project focused on robotic motion controlled by neural networks. his research advisor was arijit raychowdhury, who is the motorola solutions foundation professor in ece. 
 tony wang 
 is a second year ece ph.d. student, and he is advised by assistant professor azadeh ansari and kimberly hoang, an assistant professor in the department of neurosurgery at the emory university school of medicine. wang’s current research is focused on developing micro-robots that perform neurosurgery. he graduated in 2019 with his b.s. degree in materials science and engineering with a minor in electrical engineering and computer science at the university of california, berkeley. while at berkeley, wang interned at lawrence livermore national laboratory and did work on laser optics. 
 additional images 
 related links 
 school of electrical and computer engineering 
 george w. woodruff school of mechanical engineering 
 emory university school of medicine 
 georgia tech 
 national science foundation graduate research fellowship program 
 contact 
 jackie nemeth 
 school of electrical and computer engineering 
 email 
 jackie.nemeth@ece.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000