topic announced for campus quality enhancement plan, focus on transformative learning experiences 
 georgia tech has selected the topic of its next quality enhancement plan (qep), a critical piece of the institute’s reaffirmation of accreditation from the southern association of colleges and schools commission on colleges (sacscoc). 
 the heart of the new qep topic is the creation and implementation of transformative learning experiences that prepare georgia tech students for leadership roles. 
 jun 22, 2023 
 georgia tech has selected the topic of its next quality enhancement plan (qep), a critical piece of the institute’s reaffirmation of accreditation from the southern association of colleges and schools commission on colleges (sacscoc). after consideration of potential topics, the qep committee has selected “leadership in progress and service: creating intentional and transformative learning experiences.” planning around the new topic will take place over the next year. 
 reaffirmation  is the process by which georgia tech must prove to a review team from peer institutions that the institute is qualified to continue to award academic credit. the qep should address key issues identified in our ongoing assessment process and should also support student learning. the selection committee, co-chaired by  laurence jacobs , senior vice provost for education and learning, and  steven girardot , vice provost for undergraduate education, reviewed 47 possible topics and found the focus of the chosen topic to be best aligned with the institute’s current  strategic plan  and the  transformative teaching and learning (ttl) strategic initiative . 
 the heart of the topic is the creation and implementation of transformative learning experiences that prepare georgia tech students for leadership roles. an important aspect will also be a focus on students who may be less likely to participate in existing high impact practices: under-resourced, income-limited, and first-generation students. 
 “georgia tech is known for developing leaders,” said  steve mclaughlin , provost and executive vice president for academic affairs. “the leaders of the future arrive on our campus with a wide range of academic and life circumstances, which means that a singular, one-size-fits-all college experience isn’t best to ensure student success. we want all georgia tech students to have the resources they need to become the leaders we know they can be, and the topic selected for our next qep is intended to do exactly that.” 
 the next step of qep development will involve outlining a course of action that includes the creation of a timeline and budget for implementation. this work will be operationally based within the  office of undergraduate education (oue)  and will be executed in collaboration with the  office of academic effectiveness , as well as faculty, staff, and students from across campus. 
 the institute’s reaffirmation of sacscoc accreditation will take place in 2025, so the qep design process will occur throughout the next year and will include opportunities for campus engagement from faculty and staff; the establishment of a design and planning committee; and hiring of a qep faculty director. updates on the process and ways to become involved will be made available on the  provost’s quality enhancement plan webpage . 
 “an incredible amount of work goes into the qep topic selection, design, and implementation process,” said  mclaughlin . “we are deeply appreciative of the ideas shared by our campus topic contributors, as well as the thoughtful work of the co-chairs and selection committee. reaccreditation is no small task, but support from georgia tech faculty, staff, and students will help us bring the qep topic to life in a meaningful way.” 
 additional images 
 contact 
 brittany aiello 
 faculty communications program manager 
 organizational, academic, and research communications 
 email 
 brittany.aiello@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000