triple jacket amy stone leaves lasting legacy at georgia tech 
 amy stone earned three georgia tech degrees over 17 years and had a hand in two transformative projects on campus. 
 remote video url 
 dec 05, 2023 
 when amy stone first arrived on the georgia tech campus in 2006 to pursue a bachelor's degree in architecture, she was in awe of her surroundings. seventeen years later, the soon-to-be triple jacket and mother of three leaves behind her own stamp on the institute's future. 
 while she didn't realize how much time she'd spend at tech after arriving as a transfer student, stone knew instantly that she had found a home here. 
 "i remember driving up to georgia tech and just being wowed by the beauty of the campus and its history and feeling like this place was special,” she said. “this green urban campus in the middle of a city has so much to offer. i kept coming back for the quality of the education, and i love to see how the campus has gotten more beautiful, advanced, and innovative by improving upon itself." 
 among the transformative projects completed during stone's time on campus is the kendeda building for innovative and sustainable design — a building she had a hand in designing as a member of the project team. 
 "it's such an honor as a student to be able to put my own thumbprint on this campus that has given me so much. i'm so proud of the outcome and that it can be used as an example, as a learning lab, and an educational opportunity to show this is what sustainability looks like," she said. 
 as construction crews continue their work on the early stages of tech square phase 3, stone sees another dream project come to fruition, having worked on the concept phase of the high-rise towers. the scheller and george towers will add more than 400,000 square feet of new space for research and collaboration and, to stone, signify an ongoing commitment to the institute putting its mission statement into action. 
 "there is something so ambitious and beautiful about this project, continuing to connect a green, urban campus to these dense buildings that are reaching up and stating to the skyline, 'we are georgia tech,'" she said of the towers, which are expected to be completed in 2026. 
 stone has seen the campus grow through the years alongside her growing family, which now includes three kids. after completing her first degree, she and her husband, lorrin, welcomed their first two children. when she returned to tech to pursue a master's degree in architecture, her children were there to lend a helping hand. 
 "i was hauling them to student meetings, and they were meeting me in the studio between classes. they have been on campus more times than they recognize, and they are just growing as this campus grows. they have watched me do homework, they have been a part of my group assignments and group calls, and i feel it's only fitting that they are here at commencement at the final moment with me," she said. 
 that teamwork played a key role in stone's final semester of her master's program in 2020, when her backyard became her lab due to the pandemic. 
 "i built my model for my final project with my son and my daughter breaking bricks and gluing them to the side of a facade," said stone, who was pregnant with the couple's third child at the time. "i got to bring in small hands to help with projects and explain to them what i was doing and why i was doing it in a way that they don't normally get to see. we learned a lot during the pandemic, but that's what we do at georgia tech. we innovate, we learn, we adapt." 
 intrigued by the intersection of architecture and business, stone was drawn to the scheller college of business, where she will receive her mba, bringing an end to her educational journey with her family at her side. after taking time to enjoy the holidays and complete a half ironman triathlon, stone will be teaching an architecture course at kennesaw state university in the spring. 
 additional media 
 contact 
 steven gagliano 
 - institute communications 
 email 
 steven.gagliano@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000