undergraduate admission recruits seasonal staff 
 each year the office of undergraduate admission relies on the help of nearly 40 seasonal employees to review applications to georgia tech and is looking for several part-time application readers for this year. 
 jun 09, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 it takes a village to raise a child  — and to recruit a new class of yellow jackets. 
 each year the office of undergraduate admission relies on the help of nearly 40 seasonal employees to review applications to georgia tech and is looking for several part-time application readers for this year. 
 “as our application volume has increased, we’ve consistently grown our seasonal team,” said rick clark, director of undergraduate admission. the full-time staff size has stayed nearly the same the past five years, while applications have increased 49% during that time. full-time staff also meet with high school counselors,  recruit students, conduct information sessions, and coordinate campus visits. seasonal staff are essential when  it comes to crunch time of application review. 
 clark hopes for a diverse pool of applicants for the reader positions and encourages the campus community to share this opportunity broadly with their networks. 
 “we’ve had former teachers, engineers, lawyers, all different backgrounds,” he said. “diversity of perspective is critical to helping us create an inclusive community on campus, so we are committed to ensuring this group brings a wide variety of backgrounds to our  review.” all seasonal staff are trained on georgia tech’s holistic admission process. 
 these temporary positions are largely remote and last around six months (september-february), but temporary staff members are integrated into the full-time team as much as possible. many past seasonal staff members have chosen to return in subsequent years. 
 “they not only read applications, but make notes and have conversations with our full-time staff about applicants,” clark said. “they’re integral to getting the work done and also to helping tech make the best possible selections of candidates. expanding access is one of our top priorities, and a diverse team of readers will enable us to do that.” 
 georgia tech received an additional 4,000 applications just last year, and an increase in applications to all six of its colleges. more than 45,000 students applied to georgia tech this year for an enrolling first-year class of 3,450. 
 the part-time positions are open now. 
 view the full job description and how to apply . 
 additional images 
 contact 
 kristen bailey 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000