update on launch of georgia tech administrative services center 
 the adminx team has taken a recent evaluation of the progress being made toward the launch of georgia tech’s new asc ... 
 dec 07, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 dear colleagues, 
 this message is being sent as an important update on the administrative services center (asc). 
 the adminx team has taken a recent evaluation of the progress being made toward the launch of georgia tech’s new asc with improved processes and enhanced service delivery next year. we have analyzed our current status, timeline, and risks, coupled with campus feedback provided through surveys, listening sessions, webinars, and emails, and have made the thoughtful decision to shift the date when we will begin processing transactions in the asc by 5 months. 
 beginning in october 2022, the asc will support a set of services focused on hiring. we anticipate that improvements in this area will yield significant benefits to units across the institute. it is important to note that you will not need to wait 10 months to see improvements. we will begin implementing quick wins with noticeable improvements to processes in early spring. 
 these changes will affect the timing of when asc staffing begins in earnest. we will continue to recruit for senior leadership positions so that they can be actively involved in planning and decision-making. staffing to support the center will begin to ramp up in the late spring and early summer. as we have more clarity around the specific activities that the asc will be responsible for, we will confirm the staffing requirements and then work to identify talent to ensure we have the right people in the right roles by the time each service launches in the asc. 
 i would like to emphasize that we are sensitive to concerns from campus about the timing of the launch relative to activities such as fiscal year-end and the hiring cycle. in addition, we have been confronted with an extraordinary number of unexpected, high priority issues which are requiring the attention of many of the resources dedicated to adminx. most importantly, we want to take the time needed to execute well for the georgia tech community. 
 i encourage you to take advantage of our project resources to stay up-to-date and get involved: 
 learn more about adminx, the asc, and view faqs on the 
 adminx website 
 submit your ideas or suggestions via the 
 adminx suggestion box . 
 we appreciate your patience as we navigate forward through this very important effort. the project team will have more information to share with you in the coming weeks. if you have any questions, please do not hesitate to send an email to 
 adminx@gatech.edu . 
 sincerely, 
 kelly fox 
 executive vice president 
 administration and finance 
 additional images 
 contact 
 adminx@gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000