voting resources for georgia's runoff election 
 the state of georgia will host a runoff election on tuesday, dec. 6, for one of the state’s two u.s. senate seats. 
 voting at mccamish pavilion in october 2020 
 nov 21, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 the state of georgia will host a runoff election on tuesday, dec. 6, for one of the state’s two u.s. senate seats. incumbent sen. raphael warnock is seeking a full term against herschel walker. 
 if your work hours prevent you from voting in a two-hour window before or after work, talk with your manager to schedule voting leave. students are also encouraged to vote. a student whose class schedule would otherwise prevent them from voting will be permitted and excused absence for the interval reasonably required for voting. 
 know before you go 
 early voting in the runoff begins nov. 28. anyone who plans to vote in person on election day must vote at their designated polling location. to check your georgia polling location, visit 
 mvp.sos.ga.gov . 
 at georgia polling locations, voters are required to bring a form of id. here are the types of accepted identification: 
 a georgia driver's license. 
 a photo id issued by a state or federal government agency. 
 a valid u.s. passport. 
 an employee id card containing your photograph and issued by any branch, department, agency, or entity of the u.s. government, georgia, or any county, municipality, board, authority, or other entity of georgia. 
 a valid u.s. military id card. 
 a valid tribal id card. 
 if you do not have one of the above forms of id, the state of georgia offers a free voter identification card. 
 campus voting 
 georgia tech will host early voting in the ferst center for the arts nov. 28 – 30 from 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. on-campus voting is only for fulton county residents. more information can be found 
 here . 
 voting absentee 
 you must request an absentee ballot in order to vote absentee. to vote by absentee ballot, the ballot must be postmarked by election day and delivered by 7 p.m. on dec. 6. to request an absentee ballot, the information entered online must match your voter registration record. 
 in georgia, any registered voter can vote by absentee ballot, and voters can request an absentee ballot  here  or at  ballotrequest.sos.ga.gov . visit georgia’s  runoff election guide  or the  secretary of state’s office  for more information. 
 policies and campus resources 
 georgia tech encourages full participation in the electoral process. per 
 section 8.2.7.7 
 of the 
 usg’s general policies for all personnel , employees are encouraged to exercise their constitutional right to vote in all federal, state, and local elections. per 
 section 4.1.3 
 of the 
 usg’s general policy on student affairs , students are also encouraged to vote in all federal, state, and local elections. a student whose class schedule would otherwise prevent them from voting will be permitted an excused absence for the interval reasonably required for voting. 
 in 2020, georgia tech’s faculty executive board passed a motion brought forth by representatives from the student government association (sga) requesting that teaching faculty provide academic consideration for student voters on election day. specifically, the sga motion requested that, for election day, faculty move lectures to an asynchronous format; avoid scheduling in-class quizzes, tests, or assessments; and make lecture recordings available to students unable to attend class that day. the faculty executive board passed the motion, clarifying that, although classes will still be in session, faculty members are strongly encouraged to consider making these modifications to give georgia tech students ample opportunity to participate in the election. 
 learn more about the motion. 
 while you are encouraged to engage in the normal political processes, particularly to 
 vote , please be reminded that usg employees are not permitted to manage or enter political campaigns while on duty to perform services for the usg. you also have a right to express your political views on matters of public concern. yet, it’s important that you make clear that you are speaking on your own behalf and that you are not speaking in your capacity as an employee of the usg or georgia tech — whether that is highlighting your employment with georgia tech or the usg in a bio for a speaking engagement or on social media or choosing to engage in political activity or political expression. 
 furthermore, georgia tech does not tolerate harassment, discrimination, or unprofessional conduct. employees are prohibited from telling anyone who to vote for, wearing political clothing, or displaying political memorabilia at work. usg employees are prohibited from using state property, resources, or materials (including work email) or work time to communicate personal political views or in conjunction with any political campaigning. employees are prohibited from using any usg registered trademarks when expressing personal opinions on political issues unless authorized to do so. for reference, the board of regents policy can be found here: 
 https: / / www.usg.edu / policymanual / section8 / c224 / # p8.2.18_personnel_conduct 
 additional campus resources related to voting information are available at 
 gov.gatech.edu / vote . 
 additional images 
 related links 
 georgia tech voting resources 
 georgia my voter page 
 time off to vote 
 usg policy on political activities 
 contact 
 kristen bailey 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000