wang selected for qualcomm faculty award for second consecutive year 
 ece associate professor hua wang has been selected for the 2021 qualcomm faculty award (qfa) for his contributions to next-generation (5g beyond and 6g) wireless circuits, systems, and infrastructures. 
 may 04, 2021 
 — atlanta, ga 
 hua wang has been selected for the 2021 qualcomm faculty award (qfa) for his contributions to next-generation (5g beyond and 6g) wireless circuits, systems, and infrastructures that have widely impacted research and development in the commercial sector of the semiconductor industry. this is the second year in a row that wang has won this award. 
 the qfa supports key professors and their research, with the goal of strengthening qualcomm’s engagement with faculty who also play a key role in qualcomm’s recruiting of top graduate students. 
 there is a rapidly growing need for high-performance rf, millimeter wave (mm-wave), and terahertz (thz) front-end circuits and transceiver systems to address the numerous 5g and beyond 5g wireless communications and sensing applications. wang's research group has pioneered a variety of novel circuit topologies and system architectures that are agnostic to process technology platforms and can radically improve the bandwidth, energy-efficiency, robustness, and reconfigurability of rf, mm-wave, and thz circuits and systems. wang's research has led to multiple papers in premier venues every year, including the international solid-state circuits conference (isscc) and the 
 ieee journal of solid-state circuits 
 (jssc). 
 wang is an associate professor in the georgia tech school of electrical and computer engineering (ece). he is the director of the georgia tech center of circuits and systems (ccs), and he leads the georgia tech electronics and micro-systems (gems) lab. his research interests include innovating analog, rf, mm-wave, and thz integrated circuits and hybrid systems for wireless communications, sensing, and bioelectronics applications. 
 wang is also the recipient of the 2020 darpa director's fellowship, 2020 qualcomm faculty award, 2018 darpa young faculty award, 2017 ieee microwave theory and techniques society outstanding young engineer award, and 2015 national science foundation career award. he held the georgia tech ece demetrius t. paris professorship from 2014-2018. 
 wang has authored or co-authored over 190 peer-reviewed journal and conference papers. his gems research group has won multiple academic awards and best paper awards, including the 2021 barry goldwater scholarship, 2019 marconi society paul baran young scholar, the ieee radio frequency integrated circuits (rfic) symposium best student paper awards (2014, 2016, and 2018), the ieee custom integrated circuits conference (cicc) outstanding student paper awards (2015, 2018, and 2019), the ieee cicc best conference paper award (2017), the 2016 
 ieee microwave magazine 
 best paper award, and the ieee sensors best live demo award (2016). 
 additional images 
 related links 
 hua wang 
 school of electrical and computer engineering 
 georgia tech electronics and micro-systems (gems) lab 
 georgia tech 
 qualcomm 
 contact 
 jackie nemeth 
 school of electrical and computer engineering 
 email 
 jackie.nemeth@ece.gatech.edu 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000