week of events highlights sustainable development goals 
 the campus community is invited to participate in a variety of events that increase awareness of and encourage actions that advance the 17 united nations sustainable development goals. 
 celebrating the united nations sustainable development goals (un sdg) action and awareness week 
 feb 24, 2022 
 — atlanta, ga 
 sustainable development goals action and awareness week 2022 is feb. 28 – march 4. the campus community is invited to participate in a variety of events that increase awareness of and encourage actions that advance the 
 17 united nations sustainable development goals 
 (sdgs). 
 the sdgs were adopted by the un general assembly in 2015 as part of the 2030 agenda for sustainable development. they address the world’s most monumental challenges, including poverty, inequality, climate change, environmental degradation, and peace and justice. some of the objectives are improved industry, innovation, and infrastructure; affordable and clean energy; and sustainable cities and communities. the sdgs appear by name in the 
 institute’s strategic plan 
 as long-term goals that should guide teaching, research, and operations. 
 sdg action and awareness week 2022 will begin with an interactive campus discussion, titled 
 engaging with the sdgs across campus , focusing on how the goals are being realized across the institute and ways to better work together across disciplines and departments to amplify our impact. president ángel cabrera will moderate the discussion with participants from the college of sciences, serve-learn-sustain, interdisciplinary research, and engineers without borders. 
 other events during the week include a tech dining sustainability showcase, a panel on infrastructure and sustainability, changing relationships: you and your aging parents, toilet talk with shan and shannon, a healthy georgia: exploring the impact of the energy transition on public health, the association for sustainable investment podcast club kickoff, and engaging with the sdgs to advance sustainability in atlanta. 
 view a full listing of the week’s events . 
 in fall 2020, a 
 panel discussion and keynote address 
 by cabrera introduced the tech community to the 17 goals. the event covered their relevance to the institute and emphasized how georgia tech can lead the region in implementing and advancing these goals. 
 “if we are committed to improving the human condition, then we should embrace the sdgs to guide our actions as a university,” cabrera said when introducing the sdgs. 
 sdg action and awareness week is part of a larger global effort through the university global coalition, whose partners are hosting a variety of 
 online events 
 that are open to all. 
 additional images 
 contact 
 victor rogers 
 institute communications 
 georgia institute of technology 
 north avenue atlanta, ga 30332 
 +1 404.894.2000